
			   The Great Gatsby
				  by
			 F. Scott Fitzgerald


                           Table of Contents

I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX


                              Once again
                                  to
                                 Zelda

  Then wear the gold hat, if that will move her;
  If you can bounce high, bounce for her too,
  Till she cry “Lover, gold-hatted, high-bouncing lover,
  I must have you!”

  Thomas Parke d’Invilliers


                                  I

In my younger and more vulnerable years my father gave me some advice
that I’ve been turning over in my mind ever since.

“Whenever you feel like criticizing anyone,” he told me, “just
remember that all the people in this world haven’t had the advantages
that you’ve had.”

He didn’t say any more, but we’ve always been unusually communicative
in a reserved way, and I understood that he meant a great deal more
than that. In consequence, I’m inclined to reserve all judgements, a
habit that has opened up many curious natures to me and also made me
the victim of not a few veteran bores. The abnormal mind is quick to
detect and attach itself to this quality when it appears in a normal
person, and so it came about that in college I was unjustly accused of
being a politician, because I was privy to the secret griefs of wild,
unknown men. Most of the confidences were unsought—frequently I have
feigned sleep, preoccupation, or a hostile levity when I realized by
some unmistakable sign that an intimate revelation was quivering on
the horizon; for the intimate revelations of young men, or at least
the terms in which they express them, are usually plagiaristic and
marred by obvious suppressions. Reserving judgements is a matter of
infinite hope. I am still a little afraid of missing something if I
forget that, as my father snobbishly suggested, and I snobbishly
repeat, a sense of the fundamental decencies is parcelled out
unequally at birth.

And, after boasting this way of my tolerance, I come to the admission
that it has a limit. Conduct may be founded on the hard rock or the
wet marshes, but after a certain point I don’t care what it’s founded
on. When I came back from the East last autumn I felt that I wanted
the world to be in uniform and at a sort of moral attention forever; I
wanted no more riotous excursions with privileged glimpses into the
human heart. Only Gatsby, the man who gives his name to this book, was
exempt from my reaction—Gatsby, who represented everything for which I
have an unaffected scorn. If personality is an unbroken series of
successful gestures, then there was something gorgeous about him, some
heightened sensitivity to the promises of life, as if he were related
to one of those intricate machines that register earthquakes ten
thousand miles away. This responsiveness had nothing to do with that
flabby impressionability which is dignified under the name of the
“creative temperament”—it was an extraordinary gift for hope, a
romantic readiness such as I have never found in any other person and
which it is not likely I shall ever find again. No—Gatsby turned out
all right at the end; it is what preyed on Gatsby, what foul dust
floated in the wake of his dreams that temporarily closed out my
interest in the abortive sorrows and short-winded elations of men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

My family have been prominent, well-to-do people in this Middle
Western city for three generations. The Carraways are something of a
clan, and we have a tradition that we’re descended from the Dukes of
Buccleuch, but the actual founder of my line was my grandfather’s
brother, who came here in fifty-one, sent a substitute to the Civil
War, and started the wholesale hardware business that my father
carries on today.

I never saw this great-uncle, but I’m supposed to look like him—with
special reference to the rather hard-boiled painting that hangs in
father’s office. I graduated from New Haven in 1915, just a quarter of
a century after my father, and a little later I participated in that
delayed Teutonic migration known as the Great War. I enjoyed the
counter-raid so thoroughly that I came back restless. Instead of being
the warm centre of the world, the Middle West now seemed like the
ragged edge of the universe—so I decided to go East and learn the bond
business. Everybody I knew was in the bond business, so I supposed it
could support one more single man. All my aunts and uncles talked it
over as if they were choosing a prep school for me, and finally said,
“Why—ye-es,” with very grave, hesitant faces. Father agreed to finance
me for a year, and after various delays I came East, permanently, I
thought, in the spring of twenty-two.

The practical thing was to find rooms in the city, but it was a warm
season, and I had just left a country of wide lawns and friendly
trees, so when a young man at the office suggested that we take a
house together in a commuting town, it sounded like a great idea. He
found the house, a weather-beaten cardboard bungalow at eighty a
month, but at the last minute the firm ordered him to Washington, and
I went out to the country alone. I had a dog—at least I had him for a
few days until he ran away—and an old Dodge and a Finnish woman, who
made my bed and cooked breakfast and muttered Finnish wisdom to
herself over the electric stove.

It was lonely for a day or so until one morning some man, more
recently arrived than I, stopped me on the road.

“How do you get to West Egg village?” he asked helplessly.

I told him. And as I walked on I was lonely no longer. I was a guide,
a pathfinder, an original settler. He had casually conferred on me the
freedom of the neighbourhood.

And so with the sunshine and the great bursts of leaves growing on the
trees, just as things grow in fast movies, I had that familiar
conviction that life was beginning over again with the summer.

There was so much to read, for one thing, and so much fine health to
be pulled down out of the young breath-giving air. I bought a dozen
volumes on banking and credit and investment securities, and they
stood on my shelf in red and gold like new money from the mint,
promising to unfold the shining secrets that only Midas and Morgan and
Maecenas knew. And I had the high intention of reading many other
books besides. I was rather literary in college—one year I wrote a
series of very solemn and obvious editorials for the Yale News—and now
I was going to bring back all such things into my life and become
again that most limited of all specialists, the “well-rounded man.”
This isn’t just an epigram—life is much more successfully looked at
from a single window, after all.

It was a matter of chance that I should have rented a house in one of
the strangest communities in North America. It was on that slender
riotous island which extends itself due east of New York—and where
there are, among other natural curiosities, two unusual formations of
land. Twenty miles from the city a pair of enormous eggs, identical in
contour and separated only by a courtesy bay, jut out into the most
domesticated body of salt water in the Western hemisphere, the great
wet barnyard of Long Island Sound. They are not perfect ovals—like the
egg in the Columbus story, they are both crushed flat at the contact
end—but their physical resemblance must be a source of perpetual
wonder to the gulls that fly overhead. To the wingless a more
interesting phenomenon is their dissimilarity in every particular
except shape and size.

I lived at West Egg, the—well, the less fashionable of the two, though
this is a most superficial tag to express the bizarre and not a little
sinister contrast between them. My house was at the very tip of the
egg, only fifty yards from the Sound, and squeezed between two huge
places that rented for twelve or fifteen thousand a season. The one on
my right was a colossal affair by any standard—it was a factual
imitation of some Hôtel de Ville in Normandy, with a tower on one
side, spanking new under a thin beard of raw ivy, and a marble
swimming pool, and more than forty acres of lawn and garden. It was
Gatsby’s mansion. Or, rather, as I didn’t know Mr. Gatsby, it was a
mansion inhabited by a gentleman of that name. My own house was an
eyesore, but it was a small eyesore, and it had been overlooked, so I
had a view of the water, a partial view of my neighbour’s lawn, and
the consoling proximity of millionaires—all for eighty dollars a
month.

Across the courtesy bay the white palaces of fashionable East Egg
glittered along the water, and the history of the summer really begins
on the evening I drove over there to have dinner with the Tom
Buchanans. Daisy was my second cousin once removed, and I’d known Tom
in college. And just after the war I spent two days with them in
Chicago.

Her husband, among various physical accomplishments, had been one of
the most powerful ends that ever played football at New Haven—a
national figure in a way, one of those men who reach such an acute
limited excellence at twenty-one that everything afterward savours of
anticlimax. His family were enormously wealthy—even in college his
freedom with money was a matter for reproach—but now he’d left Chicago
and come East in a fashion that rather took your breath away: for
instance, he’d brought down a string of polo ponies from Lake
Forest. It was hard to realize that a man in my own generation was
wealthy enough to do that.

Why they came East I don’t know. They had spent a year in France for
no particular reason, and then drifted here and there unrestfully
wherever people played polo and were rich together. This was a
permanent move, said Daisy over the telephone, but I didn’t believe
it—I had no sight into Daisy’s heart, but I felt that Tom would drift
on forever seeking, a little wistfully, for the dramatic turbulence of
some irrecoverable football game.

And so it happened that on a warm windy evening I drove over to East
Egg to see two old friends whom I scarcely knew at all. Their house
was even more elaborate than I expected, a cheerful red-and-white
Georgian Colonial mansion, overlooking the bay. The lawn started at
the beach and ran towards the front door for a quarter of a mile,
jumping over sundials and brick walks and burning gardens—finally when
it reached the house drifting up the side in bright vines as though
from the momentum of its run. The front was broken by a line of French
windows, glowing now with reflected gold and wide open to the warm
windy afternoon, and Tom Buchanan in riding clothes was standing with
his legs apart on the front porch.

He had changed since his New Haven years. Now he was a sturdy
straw-haired man of thirty, with a rather hard mouth and a
supercilious manner. Two shining arrogant eyes had established
dominance over his face and gave him the appearance of always leaning
aggressively forward. Not even the effeminate swank of his riding
clothes could hide the enormous power of that body—he seemed to fill
those glistening boots until he strained the top lacing, and you could
see a great pack of muscle shifting when his shoulder moved under his
thin coat. It was a body capable of enormous leverage—a cruel body.

His speaking voice, a gruff husky tenor, added to the impression of
fractiousness he conveyed. There was a touch of paternal contempt in
it, even toward people he liked—and there were men at New Haven who
had hated his guts.

“Now, don’t think my opinion on these matters is final,” he seemed to
say, “just because I’m stronger and more of a man than you are.” We
were in the same senior society, and while we were never intimate I
always had the impression that he approved of me and wanted me to like
him with some harsh, defiant wistfulness of his own.

We talked for a few minutes on the sunny porch.

“I’ve got a nice place here,” he said, his eyes flashing about
restlessly.

Turning me around by one arm, he moved a broad flat hand along the
front vista, including in its sweep a sunken Italian garden, a half
acre of deep, pungent roses, and a snub-nosed motorboat that bumped
the tide offshore.

“It belonged to Demaine, the oil man.” He turned me around again,
politely and abruptly. “We’ll go inside.”

We walked through a high hallway into a bright rosy-coloured space,
fragilely bound into the house by French windows at either end. The
windows were ajar and gleaming white against the fresh grass outside
that seemed to grow a little way into the house. A breeze blew through
the room, blew curtains in at one end and out the other like pale
flags, twisting them up toward the frosted wedding-cake of the
ceiling, and then rippled over the wine-coloured rug, making a shadow
on it as wind does on the sea.

The only completely stationary object in the room was an enormous
couch on which two young women were buoyed up as though upon an
anchored balloon. They were both in white, and their dresses were
rippling and fluttering as if they had just been blown back in after a
short flight around the house. I must have stood for a few moments
listening to the whip and snap of the curtains and the groan of a
picture on the wall. Then there was a boom as Tom Buchanan shut the
rear windows and the caught wind died out about the room, and the
curtains and the rugs and the two young women ballooned slowly to the
floor.

The younger of the two was a stranger to me. She was extended full
length at her end of the divan, completely motionless, and with her
chin raised a little, as if she were balancing something on it which
was quite likely to fall. If she saw me out of the corner of her eyes
she gave no hint of it—indeed, I was almost surprised into murmuring
an apology for having disturbed her by coming in.

The other girl, Daisy, made an attempt to rise—she leaned slightly
forward with a conscientious expression—then she laughed, an absurd,
charming little laugh, and I laughed too and came forward into the
room.

“I’m p-paralysed with happiness.”

She laughed again, as if she said something very witty, and held my
hand for a moment, looking up into my face, promising that there was
no one in the world she so much wanted to see. That was a way she
had. She hinted in a murmur that the surname of the balancing girl was
Baker. (I’ve heard it said that Daisy’s murmur was only to make people
lean toward her; an irrelevant criticism that made it no less
charming.)

At any rate, Miss Baker’s lips fluttered, she nodded at me almost
imperceptibly, and then quickly tipped her head back again—the object
she was balancing had obviously tottered a little and given her
something of a fright. Again a sort of apology arose to my lips.
Almost any exhibition of complete self-sufficiency draws a stunned
tribute from me.

I looked back at my cousin, who began to ask me questions in her low,
thrilling voice. It was the kind of voice that the ear follows up and
down, as if each speech is an arrangement of notes that will never be
played again. Her face was sad and lovely with bright things in it,
bright eyes and a bright passionate mouth, but there was an excitement
in her voice that men who had cared for her found difficult to forget:
a singing compulsion, a whispered “Listen,” a promise that she had
done gay, exciting things just a while since and that there were gay,
exciting things hovering in the next hour.

I told her how I had stopped off in Chicago for a day on my way East,
and how a dozen people had sent their love through me.

“Do they miss me?” she cried ecstatically.

“The whole town is desolate. All the cars have the left rear wheel
painted black as a mourning wreath, and there’s a persistent wail all
night along the north shore.”

“How gorgeous! Let’s go back, Tom. Tomorrow!” Then she added
irrelevantly: “You ought to see the baby.”

“I’d like to.”

“She’s asleep. She’s three years old. Haven’t you ever seen her?”

“Never.”

“Well, you ought to see her. She’s—”

Tom Buchanan, who had been hovering restlessly about the room, stopped
and rested his hand on my shoulder.

“What you doing, Nick?”

“I’m a bond man.”

“Who with?”

I told him.

“Never heard of them,” he remarked decisively.

This annoyed me.

“You will,” I answered shortly. “You will if you stay in the East.”

“Oh, I’ll stay in the East, don’t you worry,” he said, glancing at
Daisy and then back at me, as if he were alert for something
more. “I’d be a God damned fool to live anywhere else.”

At this point Miss Baker said: “Absolutely!” with such suddenness that
I started—it was the first word she had uttered since I came into the
room. Evidently it surprised her as much as it did me, for she yawned
and with a series of rapid, deft movements stood up into the room.

“I’m stiff,” she complained, “I’ve been lying on that sofa for as long
as I can remember.”

“Don’t look at me,” Daisy retorted, “I’ve been trying to get you to
New York all afternoon.”

“No, thanks,” said Miss Baker to the four cocktails just in from the
pantry. “I’m absolutely in training.”

Her host looked at her incredulously.

“You are!” He took down his drink as if it were a drop in the bottom
of a glass. “How you ever get anything done is beyond me.”

I looked at Miss Baker, wondering what it was she “got done.” I
enjoyed looking at her. She was a slender, small-breasted girl, with
an erect carriage, which she accentuated by throwing her body backward
at the shoulders like a young cadet. Her grey sun-strained eyes looked
back at me with polite reciprocal curiosity out of a wan, charming,
discontented face. It occurred to me now that I had seen her, or a
picture of her, somewhere before.

“You live in West Egg,” she remarked contemptuously. “I know somebody
there.”

“I don’t know a single—”

“You must know Gatsby.”

“Gatsby?” demanded Daisy. “What Gatsby?”

Before I could reply that he was my neighbour dinner was announced;
wedging his tense arm imperatively under mine, Tom Buchanan compelled
me from the room as though he were moving a checker to another square.

Slenderly, languidly, their hands set lightly on their hips, the two
young women preceded us out on to a rosy-coloured porch, open toward
the sunset, where four candles flickered on the table in the
diminished wind.

“Why candles?” objected Daisy, frowning. She snapped them out with her
fingers. “In two weeks it’ll be the longest day in the year.” She
looked at us all radiantly. “Do you always watch for the longest day
of the year and then miss it? I always watch for the longest day in
the year and then miss it.”

“We ought to plan something,” yawned Miss Baker, sitting down at the
table as if she were getting into bed.

“All right,” said Daisy. “What’ll we plan?” She turned to me
helplessly: “What do people plan?”

Before I could answer her eyes fastened with an awed expression on her
little finger.

“Look!” she complained; “I hurt it.”

We all looked—the knuckle was black and blue.

“You did it, Tom,” she said accusingly. “I know you didn’t mean to,
but you did do it. That’s what I get for marrying a brute of a man, a
great, big, hulking physical specimen of a—”

“I hate that word ‘hulking,’ ” objected Tom crossly, “even in
kidding.”

“Hulking,” insisted Daisy.

Sometimes she and Miss Baker talked at once, unobtrusively and with a
bantering inconsequence that was never quite chatter, that was as cool
as their white dresses and their impersonal eyes in the absence of all
desire. They were here, and they accepted Tom and me, making only a
polite pleasant effort to entertain or to be entertained. They knew
that presently dinner would be over and a little later the evening too
would be over and casually put away. It was sharply different from the
West, where an evening was hurried from phase to phase towards its
close, in a continually disappointed anticipation or else in sheer
nervous dread of the moment itself.

“You make me feel uncivilized, Daisy,” I confessed on my second glass
of corky but rather impressive claret. “Can’t you talk about crops or
something?”

I meant nothing in particular by this remark, but it was taken up in
an unexpected way.

“Civilization’s going to pieces,” broke out Tom violently. “I’ve
gotten to be a terrible pessimist about things. Have you read The Rise
of the Coloured Empires by this man Goddard?”

“Why, no,” I answered, rather surprised by his tone.

“Well, it’s a fine book, and everybody ought to read it. The idea is
if we don’t look out the white race will be—will be utterly
submerged. It’s all scientific stuff; it’s been proved.”

“Tom’s getting very profound,” said Daisy, with an expression of
unthoughtful sadness. “He reads deep books with long words in
them. What was that word we—”

“Well, these books are all scientific,” insisted Tom, glancing at her
impatiently. “This fellow has worked out the whole thing. It’s up to
us, who are the dominant race, to watch out or these other races will
have control of things.”

“We’ve got to beat them down,” whispered Daisy, winking ferociously
toward the fervent sun.

“You ought to live in California—” began Miss Baker, but Tom
interrupted her by shifting heavily in his chair.

“This idea is that we’re Nordics. I am, and you are, and you are,
and—” After an infinitesimal hesitation he included Daisy with a
slight nod, and she winked at me again. “—And we’ve produced all the
things that go to make civilization—oh, science and art, and all
that. Do you see?”

There was something pathetic in his concentration, as if his
complacency, more acute than of old, was not enough to him any more.
When, almost immediately, the telephone rang inside and the butler
left the porch Daisy seized upon the momentary interruption and leaned
towards me.

“I’ll tell you a family secret,” she whispered enthusiastically.
“It’s about the butler’s nose. Do you want to hear about the butler’s
nose?”

“That’s why I came over tonight.”

“Well, he wasn’t always a butler; he used to be the silver polisher
for some people in New York that had a silver service for two hundred
people. He had to polish it from morning till night, until finally it
began to affect his nose—”

“Things went from bad to worse,” suggested Miss Baker.

“Yes. Things went from bad to worse, until finally he had to give up
his position.”

For a moment the last sunshine fell with romantic affection upon her
glowing face; her voice compelled me forward breathlessly as I
listened—then the glow faded, each light deserting her with lingering
regret, like children leaving a pleasant street at dusk.

The butler came back and murmured something close to Tom’s ear,
whereupon Tom frowned, pushed back his chair, and without a word went
inside. As if his absence quickened something within her, Daisy leaned
forward again, her voice glowing and singing.

“I love to see you at my table, Nick. You remind me of a—of a rose, an
absolute rose. Doesn’t he?” She turned to Miss Baker for confirmation:
“An absolute rose?”

This was untrue. I am not even faintly like a rose. She was only
extemporizing, but a stirring warmth flowed from her, as if her heart
was trying to come out to you concealed in one of those breathless,
thrilling words. Then suddenly she threw her napkin on the table and
excused herself and went into the house.

Miss Baker and I exchanged a short glance consciously devoid of
meaning. I was about to speak when she sat up alertly and said “Sh!”
in a warning voice. A subdued impassioned murmur was audible in the
room beyond, and Miss Baker leaned forward unashamed, trying to
hear. The murmur trembled on the verge of coherence, sank down,
mounted excitedly, and then ceased altogether.

“This Mr. Gatsby you spoke of is my neighbour—” I began.

“Don’t talk. I want to hear what happens.”

“Is something happening?” I inquired innocently.

“You mean to say you don’t know?” said Miss Baker, honestly surprised.
“I thought everybody knew.”

“I don’t.”

“Why—” she said hesitantly. “Tom’s got some woman in New York.”

“Got some woman?” I repeated blankly.

Miss Baker nodded.

“She might have the decency not to telephone him at dinner time.
Don’t you think?”

Almost before I had grasped her meaning there was the flutter of a
dress and the crunch of leather boots, and Tom and Daisy were back at
the table.

“It couldn’t be helped!” cried Daisy with tense gaiety.

She sat down, glanced searchingly at Miss Baker and then at me, and
continued: “I looked outdoors for a minute, and it’s very romantic
outdoors. There’s a bird on the lawn that I think must be a
nightingale come over on the Cunard or White Star Line. He’s singing
away—” Her voice sang: “It’s romantic, isn’t it, Tom?”

“Very romantic,” he said, and then miserably to me: “If it’s light
enough after dinner, I want to take you down to the stables.”

The telephone rang inside, startlingly, and as Daisy shook her head
decisively at Tom the subject of the stables, in fact all subjects,
vanished into air. Among the broken fragments of the last five minutes
at table I remember the candles being lit again, pointlessly, and I
was conscious of wanting to look squarely at everyone, and yet to
avoid all eyes. I couldn’t guess what Daisy and Tom were thinking, but
I doubt if even Miss Baker, who seemed to have mastered a certain
hardy scepticism, was able utterly to put this fifth guest’s shrill
metallic urgency out of mind. To a certain temperament the situation
might have seemed intriguing—my own instinct was to telephone
immediately for the police.

The horses, needless to say, were not mentioned again. Tom and Miss
Baker, with several feet of twilight between them, strolled back into
the library, as if to a vigil beside a perfectly tangible body, while,
trying to look pleasantly interested and a little deaf, I followed
Daisy around a chain of connecting verandas to the porch in front. In
its deep gloom we sat down side by side on a wicker settee.

Daisy took her face in her hands as if feeling its lovely shape, and
her eyes moved gradually out into the velvet dusk. I saw that
turbulent emotions possessed her, so I asked what I thought would be
some sedative questions about her little girl.

“We don’t know each other very well, Nick,” she said suddenly. “Even
if we are cousins. You didn’t come to my wedding.”

“I wasn’t back from the war.”

“That’s true.” She hesitated. “Well, I’ve had a very bad time, Nick,
and I’m pretty cynical about everything.”

Evidently she had reason to be. I waited but she didn’t say any more,
and after a moment I returned rather feebly to the subject of her
daughter.

“I suppose she talks, and—eats, and everything.”

“Oh, yes.” She looked at me absently. “Listen, Nick; let me tell you
what I said when she was born. Would you like to hear?”

“Very much.”

“It’ll show you how I’ve gotten to feel about—things. Well, she was
less than an hour old and Tom was God knows where. I woke up out of
the ether with an utterly abandoned feeling, and asked the nurse right
away if it was a boy or a girl. She told me it was a girl, and so I
turned my head away and wept. ‘All right,’ I said, ‘I’m glad it’s a
girl. And I hope she’ll be a fool—that’s the best thing a girl can be
in this world, a beautiful little fool.’

“You see I think everything’s terrible anyhow,” she went on in a
convinced way. “Everybody thinks so—the most advanced people. And I
know. I’ve been everywhere and seen everything and done everything.”
Her eyes flashed around her in a defiant way, rather like Tom’s, and
she laughed with thrilling scorn. “Sophisticated—God, I’m
sophisticated!”

The instant her voice broke off, ceasing to compel my attention, my
belief, I felt the basic insincerity of what she had said. It made me
uneasy, as though the whole evening had been a trick of some sort to
exact a contributory emotion from me. I waited, and sure enough, in a
moment she looked at me with an absolute smirk on her lovely face, as
if she had asserted her membership in a rather distinguished secret
society to which she and Tom belonged.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Inside, the crimson room bloomed with light. Tom and Miss Baker sat at
either end of the long couch and she read aloud to him from the
Saturday Evening Post—the words, murmurous and uninflected, running
together in a soothing tune. The lamplight, bright on his boots and
dull on the autumn-leaf yellow of her hair, glinted along the paper as
she turned a page with a flutter of slender muscles in her arms.

When we came in she held us silent for a moment with a lifted hand.

“To be continued,” she said, tossing the magazine on the table, “in
our very next issue.”

Her body asserted itself with a restless movement of her knee, and she
stood up.

“Ten o’clock,” she remarked, apparently finding the time on the
ceiling. “Time for this good girl to go to bed.”

“Jordan’s going to play in the tournament tomorrow,” explained Daisy,
“over at Westchester.”

“Oh—you’re Jordan Baker.”

I knew now why her face was familiar—its pleasing contemptuous
expression had looked out at me from many rotogravure pictures of the
sporting life at Asheville and Hot Springs and Palm Beach. I had heard
some story of her too, a critical, unpleasant story, but what it was I
had forgotten long ago.

“Good night,” she said softly. “Wake me at eight, won’t you.”

“If you’ll get up.”

“I will. Good night, Mr. Carraway. See you anon.”

“Of course you will,” confirmed Daisy. “In fact I think I’ll arrange a
marriage. Come over often, Nick, and I’ll sort of—oh—fling you
together. You know—lock you up accidentally in linen closets and push
you out to sea in a boat, and all that sort of thing—”

“Good night,” called Miss Baker from the stairs. “I haven’t heard a
word.”

“She’s a nice girl,” said Tom after a moment. “They oughtn’t to let
her run around the country this way.”

“Who oughtn’t to?” inquired Daisy coldly.

“Her family.”

“Her family is one aunt about a thousand years old. Besides, Nick’s
going to look after her, aren’t you, Nick? She’s going to spend lots
of weekends out here this summer. I think the home influence will be
very good for her.”

Daisy and Tom looked at each other for a moment in silence.

“Is she from New York?” I asked quickly.

“From Louisville. Our white girlhood was passed together there. Our
beautiful white—”

“Did you give Nick a little heart to heart talk on the veranda?”
demanded Tom suddenly.

“Did I?” She looked at me. “I can’t seem to remember, but I think we
talked about the Nordic race. Yes, I’m sure we did. It sort of crept
up on us and first thing you know—”

“Don’t believe everything you hear, Nick,” he advised me.

I said lightly that I had heard nothing at all, and a few minutes
later I got up to go home. They came to the door with me and stood
side by side in a cheerful square of light. As I started my motor
Daisy peremptorily called: “Wait!”

“I forgot to ask you something, and it’s important. We heard you were
engaged to a girl out West.”

“That’s right,” corroborated Tom kindly. “We heard that you were
engaged.”

“It’s a libel. I’m too poor.”

“But we heard it,” insisted Daisy, surprising me by opening up again
in a flower-like way. “We heard it from three people, so it must be
true.”

Of course I knew what they were referring to, but I wasn’t even
vaguely engaged. The fact that gossip had published the banns was one
of the reasons I had come East. You can’t stop going with an old
friend on account of rumours, and on the other hand I had no intention
of being rumoured into marriage.

Their interest rather touched me and made them less remotely
rich—nevertheless, I was confused and a little disgusted as I drove
away. It seemed to me that the thing for Daisy to do was to rush out
of the house, child in arms—but apparently there were no such
intentions in her head. As for Tom, the fact that he “had some woman
in New York” was really less surprising than that he had been
depressed by a book. Something was making him nibble at the edge of
stale ideas as if his sturdy physical egotism no longer nourished his
peremptory heart.

Already it was deep summer on roadhouse roofs and in front of wayside
garages, where new red petrol-pumps sat out in pools of light, and
when I reached my estate at West Egg I ran the car under its shed and
sat for a while on an abandoned grass roller in the yard. The wind had
blown off, leaving a loud, bright night, with wings beating in the
trees and a persistent organ sound as the full bellows of the earth
blew the frogs full of life. The silhouette of a moving cat wavered
across the moonlight, and, turning my head to watch it, I saw that I
was not alone—fifty feet away a figure had emerged from the shadow of
my neighbour’s mansion and was standing with his hands in his pockets
regarding the silver pepper of the stars. Something in his leisurely
movements and the secure position of his feet upon the lawn suggested
that it was Mr. Gatsby himself, come out to determine what share was
his of our local heavens.

I decided to call to him. Miss Baker had mentioned him at dinner, and
that would do for an introduction. But I didn’t call to him, for he
gave a sudden intimation that he was content to be alone—he stretched
out his arms toward the dark water in a curious way, and, far as I was
from him, I could have sworn he was trembling. Involuntarily I glanced
seaward—and distinguished nothing except a single green light, minute
and far away, that might have been the end of a dock. When I looked
once more for Gatsby he had vanished, and I was alone again in the
unquiet darkness.


                                  II

About halfway between West Egg and New York the motor road hastily
joins the railroad and runs beside it for a quarter of a mile, so as
to shrink away from a certain desolate area of land. This is a valley
of ashes—a fantastic farm where ashes grow like wheat into ridges and
hills and grotesque gardens; where ashes take the forms of houses and
chimneys and rising smoke and, finally, with a transcendent effort, of
ash-grey men, who move dimly and already crumbling through the powdery
air. Occasionally a line of grey cars crawls along an invisible track,
gives out a ghastly creak, and comes to rest, and immediately the
ash-grey men swarm up with leaden spades and stir up an impenetrable
cloud, which screens their obscure operations from your sight.

But above the grey land and the spasms of bleak dust which drift
endlessly over it, you perceive, after a moment, the eyes of Doctor T.
J. Eckleburg. The eyes of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg are blue and
gigantic—their retinas are one yard high. They look out of no face,
but, instead, from a pair of enormous yellow spectacles which pass
over a nonexistent nose. Evidently some wild wag of an oculist set
them there to fatten his practice in the borough of Queens, and then
sank down himself into eternal blindness, or forgot them and moved
away. But his eyes, dimmed a little by many paintless days, under sun
and rain, brood on over the solemn dumping ground.

The valley of ashes is bounded on one side by a small foul river, and,
when the drawbridge is up to let barges through, the passengers on
waiting trains can stare at the dismal scene for as long as half an
hour. There is always a halt there of at least a minute, and it was
because of this that I first met Tom Buchanan’s mistress.

The fact that he had one was insisted upon wherever he was known. His
acquaintances resented the fact that he turned up in popular cafés
with her and, leaving her at a table, sauntered about, chatting with
whomsoever he knew. Though I was curious to see her, I had no desire
to meet her—but I did. I went up to New York with Tom on the train one
afternoon, and when we stopped by the ash-heaps he jumped to his feet
and, taking hold of my elbow, literally forced me from the car.

“We’re getting off,” he insisted. “I want you to meet my girl.”

I think he’d tanked up a good deal at luncheon, and his determination
to have my company bordered on violence. The supercilious assumption
was that on Sunday afternoon I had nothing better to do.

I followed him over a low whitewashed railroad fence, and we walked
back a hundred yards along the road under Doctor Eckleburg’s
persistent stare. The only building in sight was a small block of
yellow brick sitting on the edge of the waste land, a sort of compact
Main Street ministering to it, and contiguous to absolutely nothing.
One of the three shops it contained was for rent and another was an
all-night restaurant, approached by a trail of ashes; the third was a
garage—Repairs. George B. Wilson. Cars bought and sold.—and I followed
Tom inside.

The interior was unprosperous and bare; the only car visible was the
dust-covered wreck of a Ford which crouched in a dim corner. It had
occurred to me that this shadow of a garage must be a blind, and that
sumptuous and romantic apartments were concealed overhead, when the
proprietor himself appeared in the door of an office, wiping his hands
on a piece of waste. He was a blond, spiritless man, anaemic, and
faintly handsome. When he saw us a damp gleam of hope sprang into his
light blue eyes.

“Hello, Wilson, old man,” said Tom, slapping him jovially on the
shoulder. “How’s business?”

“I can’t complain,” answered Wilson unconvincingly. “When are you
going to sell me that car?”

“Next week; I’ve got my man working on it now.”

“Works pretty slow, don’t he?”

“No, he doesn’t,” said Tom coldly. “And if you feel that way about it,
maybe I’d better sell it somewhere else after all.”

“I don’t mean that,” explained Wilson quickly. “I just meant—”

His voice faded off and Tom glanced impatiently around the garage.
Then I heard footsteps on a stairs, and in a moment the thickish
figure of a woman blocked out the light from the office door. She was
in the middle thirties, and faintly stout, but she carried her flesh
sensuously as some women can. Her face, above a spotted dress of dark
blue crêpe-de-chine, contained no facet or gleam of beauty, but there
was an immediately perceptible vitality about her as if the nerves of
her body were continually smouldering. She smiled slowly and, walking
through her husband as if he were a ghost, shook hands with Tom,
looking him flush in the eye. Then she wet her lips, and without
turning around spoke to her husband in a soft, coarse voice:

“Get some chairs, why don’t you, so somebody can sit down.”

“Oh, sure,” agreed Wilson hurriedly, and went toward the little
office, mingling immediately with the cement colour of the walls. A
white ashen dust veiled his dark suit and his pale hair as it veiled
everything in the vicinity—except his wife, who moved close to Tom.

“I want to see you,” said Tom intently. “Get on the next train.”

“All right.”

“I’ll meet you by the newsstand on the lower level.”

She nodded and moved away from him just as George Wilson emerged with
two chairs from his office door.

We waited for her down the road and out of sight. It was a few days
before the Fourth of July, and a grey, scrawny Italian child was
setting torpedoes in a row along the railroad track.

“Terrible place, isn’t it,” said Tom, exchanging a frown with Doctor
Eckleburg.

“Awful.”

“It does her good to get away.”

“Doesn’t her husband object?”

“Wilson? He thinks she goes to see her sister in New York. He’s so
dumb he doesn’t know he’s alive.”

So Tom Buchanan and his girl and I went up together to New York—or not
quite together, for Mrs. Wilson sat discreetly in another car. Tom
deferred that much to the sensibilities of those East Eggers who might
be on the train.

She had changed her dress to a brown figured muslin, which stretched
tight over her rather wide hips as Tom helped her to the platform in
New York. At the newsstand she bought a copy of Town Tattle and a
moving-picture magazine, and in the station drugstore some cold cream
and a small flask of perfume. Upstairs, in the solemn echoing drive
she let four taxicabs drive away before she selected a new one,
lavender-coloured with grey upholstery, and in this we slid out from
the mass of the station into the glowing sunshine. But immediately she
turned sharply from the window and, leaning forward, tapped on the
front glass.

“I want to get one of those dogs,” she said earnestly. “I want to get
one for the apartment. They’re nice to have—a dog.”

We backed up to a grey old man who bore an absurd resemblance to John
D. Rockefeller. In a basket swung from his neck cowered a dozen very
recent puppies of an indeterminate breed.

“What kind are they?” asked Mrs. Wilson eagerly, as he came to the
taxi-window.

“All kinds. What kind do you want, lady?”

“I’d like to get one of those police dogs; I don’t suppose you got
that kind?”

The man peered doubtfully into the basket, plunged in his hand and
drew one up, wriggling, by the back of the neck.

“That’s no police dog,” said Tom.

“No, it’s not exactly a police dog,” said the man with disappointment
in his voice. “It’s more of an Airedale.” He passed his hand over the
brown washrag of a back. “Look at that coat. Some coat. That’s a dog
that’ll never bother you with catching cold.”

“I think it’s cute,” said Mrs. Wilson enthusiastically. “How much is
it?”

“That dog?” He looked at it admiringly. “That dog will cost you ten
dollars.”

The Airedale—undoubtedly there was an Airedale concerned in it
somewhere, though its feet were startlingly white—changed hands and
settled down into Mrs. Wilson’s lap, where she fondled the
weatherproof coat with rapture.

“Is it a boy or a girl?” she asked delicately.

“That dog? That dog’s a boy.”

“It’s a bitch,” said Tom decisively. “Here’s your money. Go and buy
ten more dogs with it.”

We drove over to Fifth Avenue, warm and soft, almost pastoral, on the
summer Sunday afternoon. I wouldn’t have been surprised to see a great
flock of white sheep turn the corner.

“Hold on,” I said, “I have to leave you here.”

“No you don’t,” interposed Tom quickly. “Myrtle’ll be hurt if you
don’t come up to the apartment. Won’t you, Myrtle?”

“Come on,” she urged. “I’ll telephone my sister Catherine. She’s said
to be very beautiful by people who ought to know.”

“Well, I’d like to, but—”

We went on, cutting back again over the Park toward the West Hundreds.
At 158th Street the cab stopped at one slice in a long white cake of
apartment-houses. Throwing a regal homecoming glance around the
neighbourhood, Mrs. Wilson gathered up her dog and her other
purchases, and went haughtily in.

“I’m going to have the McKees come up,” she announced as we rose in
the elevator. “And, of course, I got to call up my sister, too.”

The apartment was on the top floor—a small living-room, a small
dining-room, a small bedroom, and a bath. The living-room was crowded
to the doors with a set of tapestried furniture entirely too large for
it, so that to move about was to stumble continually over scenes of
ladies swinging in the gardens of Versailles. The only picture was an
over-enlarged photograph, apparently a hen sitting on a blurred rock.
Looked at from a distance, however, the hen resolved itself into a
bonnet, and the countenance of a stout old lady beamed down into the
room. Several old copies of Town Tattle lay on the table together with
a copy of Simon Called Peter, and some of the small scandal magazines
of Broadway. Mrs. Wilson was first concerned with the dog. A reluctant
elevator boy went for a box full of straw and some milk, to which he
added on his own initiative a tin of large, hard dog biscuits—one of
which decomposed apathetically in the saucer of milk all
afternoon. Meanwhile Tom brought out a bottle of whisky from a locked
bureau door.

I have been drunk just twice in my life, and the second time was that
afternoon; so everything that happened has a dim, hazy cast over it,
although until after eight o’clock the apartment was full of cheerful
sun. Sitting on Tom’s lap Mrs. Wilson called up several people on the
telephone; then there were no cigarettes, and I went out to buy some
at the drugstore on the corner. When I came back they had both
disappeared, so I sat down discreetly in the living-room and read a
chapter of Simon Called Peter—either it was terrible stuff or the
whisky distorted things, because it didn’t make any sense to me.

Just as Tom and Myrtle (after the first drink Mrs. Wilson and I called
each other by our first names) reappeared, company commenced to arrive
at the apartment door.

The sister, Catherine, was a slender, worldly girl of about thirty,
with a solid, sticky bob of red hair, and a complexion powdered milky
white. Her eyebrows had been plucked and then drawn on again at a more
rakish angle, but the efforts of nature toward the restoration of the
old alignment gave a blurred air to her face. When she moved about
there was an incessant clicking as innumerable pottery bracelets
jingled up and down upon her arms. She came in with such a proprietary
haste, and looked around so possessively at the furniture that I
wondered if she lived here. But when I asked her she laughed
immoderately, repeated my question aloud, and told me she lived with a
girl friend at a hotel.

Mr. McKee was a pale, feminine man from the flat below. He had just
shaved, for there was a white spot of lather on his cheekbone, and he
was most respectful in his greeting to everyone in the room. He
informed me that he was in the “artistic game,” and I gathered later
that he was a photographer and had made the dim enlargement of
Mrs. Wilson’s mother which hovered like an ectoplasm on the wall. His
wife was shrill, languid, handsome, and horrible. She told me with
pride that her husband had photographed her a hundred and twenty-seven
times since they had been married.

Mrs. Wilson had changed her costume some time before, and was now
attired in an elaborate afternoon dress of cream-coloured chiffon,
which gave out a continual rustle as she swept about the room. With
the influence of the dress her personality had also undergone a
change. The intense vitality that had been so remarkable in the garage
was converted into impressive hauteur. Her laughter, her gestures, her
assertions became more violently affected moment by moment, and as she
expanded the room grew smaller around her, until she seemed to be
revolving on a noisy, creaking pivot through the smoky air.

“My dear,” she told her sister in a high, mincing shout, “most of
these fellas will cheat you every time. All they think of is money. I
had a woman up here last week to look at my feet, and when she gave me
the bill you’d of thought she had my appendicitis out.”

“What was the name of the woman?” asked Mrs. McKee.

“Mrs. Eberhardt. She goes around looking at people’s feet in their own
homes.”

“I like your dress,” remarked Mrs. McKee, “I think it’s adorable.”

Mrs. Wilson rejected the compliment by raising her eyebrow in disdain.

“It’s just a crazy old thing,” she said. “I just slip it on sometimes
when I don’t care what I look like.”

“But it looks wonderful on you, if you know what I mean,” pursued Mrs.
McKee. “If Chester could only get you in that pose I think he could
make something of it.”

We all looked in silence at Mrs. Wilson, who removed a strand of hair
from over her eyes and looked back at us with a brilliant smile. Mr.
McKee regarded her intently with his head on one side, and then moved
his hand back and forth slowly in front of his face.

“I should change the light,” he said after a moment. “I’d like to
bring out the modelling of the features. And I’d try to get hold of
all the back hair.”

“I wouldn’t think of changing the light,” cried Mrs. McKee. “I think
it’s—”

Her husband said “Sh!” and we all looked at the subject again,
whereupon Tom Buchanan yawned audibly and got to his feet.

“You McKees have something to drink,” he said. “Get some more ice and
mineral water, Myrtle, before everybody goes to sleep.”

“I told that boy about the ice.” Myrtle raised her eyebrows in despair
at the shiftlessness of the lower orders. “These people! You have to
keep after them all the time.”

She looked at me and laughed pointlessly. Then she flounced over to
the dog, kissed it with ecstasy, and swept into the kitchen, implying
that a dozen chefs awaited her orders there.

“I’ve done some nice things out on Long Island,” asserted Mr. McKee.

Tom looked at him blankly.

“Two of them we have framed downstairs.”

“Two what?” demanded Tom.

“Two studies. One of them I call Montauk Point—The Gulls, and the
other I call Montauk Point—The Sea.”

The sister Catherine sat down beside me on the couch.

“Do you live down on Long Island, too?” she inquired.

“I live at West Egg.”

“Really? I was down there at a party about a month ago. At a man named
Gatsby’s. Do you know him?”

“I live next door to him.”

“Well, they say he’s a nephew or a cousin of Kaiser Wilhelm’s. That’s
where all his money comes from.”

“Really?”

She nodded.

“I’m scared of him. I’d hate to have him get anything on me.”

This absorbing information about my neighbour was interrupted by Mrs.
McKee’s pointing suddenly at Catherine:

“Chester, I think you could do something with her,” she broke out, but
Mr. McKee only nodded in a bored way, and turned his attention to Tom.

“I’d like to do more work on Long Island, if I could get the entry.
All I ask is that they should give me a start.”

“Ask Myrtle,” said Tom, breaking into a short shout of laughter as
Mrs. Wilson entered with a tray. “She’ll give you a letter of
introduction, won’t you, Myrtle?”

“Do what?” she asked, startled.

“You’ll give McKee a letter of introduction to your husband, so he can
do some studies of him.” His lips moved silently for a moment as he
invented, “ ‘George B. Wilson at the Gasoline Pump,’ or something like
that.”

Catherine leaned close to me and whispered in my ear:

“Neither of them can stand the person they’re married to.”

“Can’t they?”

“Can’t stand them.” She looked at Myrtle and then at Tom. “What I say
is, why go on living with them if they can’t stand them? If I was them
I’d get a divorce and get married to each other right away.”

“Doesn’t she like Wilson either?”

The answer to this was unexpected. It came from Myrtle, who had
overheard the question, and it was violent and obscene.

“You see,” cried Catherine triumphantly. She lowered her voice again.
“It’s really his wife that’s keeping them apart. She’s a Catholic, and
they don’t believe in divorce.”

Daisy was not a Catholic, and I was a little shocked at the
elaborateness of the lie.

“When they do get married,” continued Catherine, “they’re going West
to live for a while until it blows over.”

“It’d be more discreet to go to Europe.”

“Oh, do you like Europe?” she exclaimed surprisingly. “I just got back
from Monte Carlo.”

“Really.”

“Just last year. I went over there with another girl.”

“Stay long?”

“No, we just went to Monte Carlo and back. We went by way of
Marseilles. We had over twelve hundred dollars when we started, but we
got gyped out of it all in two days in the private rooms. We had an
awful time getting back, I can tell you. God, how I hated that town!”

The late afternoon sky bloomed in the window for a moment like the
blue honey of the Mediterranean—then the shrill voice of Mrs. McKee
called me back into the room.

“I almost made a mistake, too,” she declared vigorously. “I almost
married a little kike who’d been after me for years. I knew he was
below me. Everybody kept saying to me: ‘Lucille, that man’s way below
you!’ But if I hadn’t met Chester, he’d of got me sure.”

“Yes, but listen,” said Myrtle Wilson, nodding her head up and down,
“at least you didn’t marry him.”

“I know I didn’t.”

“Well, I married him,” said Myrtle, ambiguously. “And that’s the
difference between your case and mine.”

“Why did you, Myrtle?” demanded Catherine. “Nobody forced you to.”

Myrtle considered.

“I married him because I thought he was a gentleman,” she said
finally. “I thought he knew something about breeding, but he wasn’t
fit to lick my shoe.”

“You were crazy about him for a while,” said Catherine.

“Crazy about him!” cried Myrtle incredulously. “Who said I was crazy
about him? I never was any more crazy about him than I was about that
man there.”

She pointed suddenly at me, and everyone looked at me accusingly. I
tried to show by my expression that I expected no affection.

“The only crazy I was was when I married him. I knew right away I made
a mistake. He borrowed somebody’s best suit to get married in, and
never even told me about it, and the man came after it one day when he
was out: ‘Oh, is that your suit?’ I said. ‘This is the first I ever
heard about it.’ But I gave it to him and then I lay down and cried to
beat the band all afternoon.”

“She really ought to get away from him,” resumed Catherine to me.
“They’ve been living over that garage for eleven years. And Tom’s the
first sweetie she ever had.”

The bottle of whisky—a second one—was now in constant demand by all
present, excepting Catherine, who “felt just as good on nothing at
all.” Tom rang for the janitor and sent him for some celebrated
sandwiches, which were a complete supper in themselves. I wanted to
get out and walk eastward toward the park through the soft twilight,
but each time I tried to go I became entangled in some wild, strident
argument which pulled me back, as if with ropes, into my chair. Yet
high over the city our line of yellow windows must have contributed
their share of human secrecy to the casual watcher in the darkening
streets, and I saw him too, looking up and wondering. I was within and
without, simultaneously enchanted and repelled by the inexhaustible
variety of life.

Myrtle pulled her chair close to mine, and suddenly her warm breath
poured over me the story of her first meeting with Tom.

“It was on the two little seats facing each other that are always the
last ones left on the train. I was going up to New York to see my
sister and spend the night. He had on a dress suit and patent leather
shoes, and I couldn’t keep my eyes off him, but every time he looked
at me I had to pretend to be looking at the advertisement over his
head. When we came into the station he was next to me, and his white
shirtfront pressed against my arm, and so I told him I’d have to call
a policeman, but he knew I lied. I was so excited that when I got into
a taxi with him I didn’t hardly know I wasn’t getting into a subway
train. All I kept thinking about, over and over, was ‘You can’t live
forever; you can’t live forever.’ ”

She turned to Mrs. McKee and the room rang full of her artificial
laughter.

“My dear,” she cried, “I’m going to give you this dress as soon as I’m
through with it. I’ve got to get another one tomorrow. I’m going to
make a list of all the things I’ve got to get. A massage and a wave,
and a collar for the dog, and one of those cute little ashtrays where
you touch a spring, and a wreath with a black silk bow for mother’s
grave that’ll last all summer. I got to write down a list so I won’t
forget all the things I got to do.”

It was nine o’clock—almost immediately afterward I looked at my watch
and found it was ten. Mr. McKee was asleep on a chair with his fists
clenched in his lap, like a photograph of a man of action. Taking out
my handkerchief I wiped from his cheek the spot of dried lather that
had worried me all the afternoon.

The little dog was sitting on the table looking with blind eyes
through the smoke, and from time to time groaning faintly. People
disappeared, reappeared, made plans to go somewhere, and then lost
each other, searched for each other, found each other a few feet
away. Some time toward midnight Tom Buchanan and Mrs. Wilson stood
face to face discussing, in impassioned voices, whether Mrs. Wilson
had any right to mention Daisy’s name.

“Daisy! Daisy! Daisy!” shouted Mrs. Wilson. “I’ll say it whenever I
want to! Daisy! Dai—”

Making a short deft movement, Tom Buchanan broke her nose with his
open hand.

Then there were bloody towels upon the bathroom floor, and women’s
voices scolding, and high over the confusion a long broken wail of
pain. Mr. McKee awoke from his doze and started in a daze toward the
door. When he had gone halfway he turned around and stared at the
scene—his wife and Catherine scolding and consoling as they stumbled
here and there among the crowded furniture with articles of aid, and
the despairing figure on the couch, bleeding fluently, and trying to
spread a copy of Town Tattle over the tapestry scenes of
Versailles. Then Mr. McKee turned and continued on out the door.
Taking my hat from the chandelier, I followed.

“Come to lunch some day,” he suggested, as we groaned down in the
elevator.

“Where?”

“Anywhere.”

“Keep your hands off the lever,” snapped the elevator boy.

“I beg your pardon,” said Mr. McKee with dignity, “I didn’t know I was
touching it.”

“All right,” I agreed, “I’ll be glad to.”

… I was standing beside his bed and he was sitting up between the
sheets, clad in his underwear, with a great portfolio in his hands.

“Beauty and the Beast … Loneliness … Old Grocery Horse … Brook’n
Bridge …”

Then I was lying half asleep in the cold lower level of the
Pennsylvania Station, staring at the morning Tribune, and waiting for
the four o’clock train.


                                 III

There was music from my neighbour’s house through the summer nights.
In his blue gardens men and girls came and went like moths among the
whisperings and the champagne and the stars. At high tide in the
afternoon I watched his guests diving from the tower of his raft, or
taking the sun on the hot sand of his beach while his two motorboats
slit the waters of the Sound, drawing aquaplanes over cataracts of
foam. On weekends his Rolls-Royce became an omnibus, bearing parties
to and from the city between nine in the morning and long past
midnight, while his station wagon scampered like a brisk yellow bug to
meet all trains. And on Mondays eight servants, including an extra
gardener, toiled all day with mops and scrubbing-brushes and hammers
and garden-shears, repairing the ravages of the night before.

Every Friday five crates of oranges and lemons arrived from a
fruiterer in New York—every Monday these same oranges and lemons left
his back door in a pyramid of pulpless halves. There was a machine in
the kitchen which could extract the juice of two hundred oranges in
half an hour if a little button was pressed two hundred times by a
butler’s thumb.

At least once a fortnight a corps of caterers came down with several
hundred feet of canvas and enough coloured lights to make a Christmas
tree of Gatsby’s enormous garden. On buffet tables, garnished with
glistening hors-d’oeuvre, spiced baked hams crowded against salads of
harlequin designs and pastry pigs and turkeys bewitched to a dark
gold. In the main hall a bar with a real brass rail was set up, and
stocked with gins and liquors and with cordials so long forgotten that
most of his female guests were too young to know one from another.

By seven o’clock the orchestra has arrived, no thin five-piece affair,
but a whole pitful of oboes and trombones and saxophones and viols and
cornets and piccolos, and low and high drums. The last swimmers have
come in from the beach now and are dressing upstairs; the cars from
New York are parked five deep in the drive, and already the halls and
salons and verandas are gaudy with primary colours, and hair bobbed in
strange new ways, and shawls beyond the dreams of Castile. The bar is
in full swing, and floating rounds of cocktails permeate the garden
outside, until the air is alive with chatter and laughter, and casual
innuendo and introductions forgotten on the spot, and enthusiastic
meetings between women who never knew each other’s names.

The lights grow brighter as the earth lurches away from the sun, and
now the orchestra is playing yellow cocktail music, and the opera of
voices pitches a key higher. Laughter is easier minute by minute,
spilled with prodigality, tipped out at a cheerful word. The groups
change more swiftly, swell with new arrivals, dissolve and form in the
same breath; already there are wanderers, confident girls who weave
here and there among the stouter and more stable, become for a sharp,
joyous moment the centre of a group, and then, excited with triumph,
glide on through the sea-change of faces and voices and colour under
the constantly changing light.

Suddenly one of these gypsies, in trembling opal, seizes a cocktail
out of the air, dumps it down for courage and, moving her hands like
Frisco, dances out alone on the canvas platform. A momentary hush; the
orchestra leader varies his rhythm obligingly for her, and there is a
burst of chatter as the erroneous news goes around that she is Gilda
Gray’s understudy from the Follies. The party has begun.

I believe that on the first night I went to Gatsby’s house I was one
of the few guests who had actually been invited. People were not
invited—they went there. They got into automobiles which bore them out
to Long Island, and somehow they ended up at Gatsby’s door. Once there
they were introduced by somebody who knew Gatsby, and after that they
conducted themselves according to the rules of behaviour associated
with an amusement park. Sometimes they came and went without having
met Gatsby at all, came for the party with a simplicity of heart that
was its own ticket of admission.

I had been actually invited. A chauffeur in a uniform of robin’s-egg
blue crossed my lawn early that Saturday morning with a surprisingly
formal note from his employer: the honour would be entirely Gatsby’s,
it said, if I would attend his “little party” that night. He had seen
me several times, and had intended to call on me long before, but a
peculiar combination of circumstances had prevented it—signed Jay
Gatsby, in a majestic hand.

Dressed up in white flannels I went over to his lawn a little after
seven, and wandered around rather ill at ease among swirls and eddies
of people I didn’t know—though here and there was a face I had noticed
on the commuting train. I was immediately struck by the number of
young Englishmen dotted about; all well dressed, all looking a little
hungry, and all talking in low, earnest voices to solid and prosperous
Americans. I was sure that they were selling something: bonds or
insurance or automobiles. They were at least agonizingly aware of the
easy money in the vicinity and convinced that it was theirs for a few
words in the right key.

As soon as I arrived I made an attempt to find my host, but the two or
three people of whom I asked his whereabouts stared at me in such an
amazed way, and denied so vehemently any knowledge of his movements,
that I slunk off in the direction of the cocktail table—the only place
in the garden where a single man could linger without looking
purposeless and alone.

I was on my way to get roaring drunk from sheer embarrassment when
Jordan Baker came out of the house and stood at the head of the marble
steps, leaning a little backward and looking with contemptuous
interest down into the garden.

Welcome or not, I found it necessary to attach myself to someone
before I should begin to address cordial remarks to the passersby.

“Hello!” I roared, advancing toward her. My voice seemed unnaturally
loud across the garden.

“I thought you might be here,” she responded absently as I came up.
“I remembered you lived next door to—”

She held my hand impersonally, as a promise that she’d take care of me
in a minute, and gave ear to two girls in twin yellow dresses, who
stopped at the foot of the steps.

“Hello!” they cried together. “Sorry you didn’t win.”

That was for the golf tournament. She had lost in the finals the week
before.

“You don’t know who we are,” said one of the girls in yellow, “but we
met you here about a month ago.”

“You’ve dyed your hair since then,” remarked Jordan, and I started,
but the girls had moved casually on and her remark was addressed to
the premature moon, produced like the supper, no doubt, out of a
caterer’s basket. With Jordan’s slender golden arm resting in mine, we
descended the steps and sauntered about the garden. A tray of
cocktails floated at us through the twilight, and we sat down at a
table with the two girls in yellow and three men, each one introduced
to us as Mr. Mumble.

“Do you come to these parties often?” inquired Jordan of the girl
beside her.

“The last one was the one I met you at,” answered the girl, in an
alert confident voice. She turned to her companion: “Wasn’t it for
you, Lucille?”

It was for Lucille, too.

“I like to come,” Lucille said. “I never care what I do, so I always
have a good time. When I was here last I tore my gown on a chair, and
he asked me my name and address—inside of a week I got a package from
Croirier’s with a new evening gown in it.”

“Did you keep it?” asked Jordan.

“Sure I did. I was going to wear it tonight, but it was too big in the
bust and had to be altered. It was gas blue with lavender beads. Two
hundred and sixty-five dollars.”

“There’s something funny about a fellow that’ll do a thing like that,”
said the other girl eagerly. “He doesn’t want any trouble with
anybody.”

“Who doesn’t?” I inquired.

“Gatsby. Somebody told me—”

The two girls and Jordan leaned together confidentially.

“Somebody told me they thought he killed a man once.”

A thrill passed over all of us. The three Mr. Mumbles bent forward and
listened eagerly.

“I don’t think it’s so much that,” argued Lucille sceptically; “It’s
more that he was a German spy during the war.”

One of the men nodded in confirmation.

“I heard that from a man who knew all about him, grew up with him in
Germany,” he assured us positively.

“Oh, no,” said the first girl, “it couldn’t be that, because he was in
the American army during the war.” As our credulity switched back to
her she leaned forward with enthusiasm. “You look at him sometimes
when he thinks nobody’s looking at him. I’ll bet he killed a man.”

She narrowed her eyes and shivered. Lucille shivered. We all turned
and looked around for Gatsby. It was testimony to the romantic
speculation he inspired that there were whispers about him from those
who had found little that it was necessary to whisper about in this
world.

The first supper—there would be another one after midnight—was now
being served, and Jordan invited me to join her own party, who were
spread around a table on the other side of the garden. There were
three married couples and Jordan’s escort, a persistent undergraduate
given to violent innuendo, and obviously under the impression that
sooner or later Jordan was going to yield him up her person to a
greater or lesser degree. Instead of rambling, this party had
preserved a dignified homogeneity, and assumed to itself the function
of representing the staid nobility of the countryside—East Egg
condescending to West Egg and carefully on guard against its
spectroscopic gaiety.

“Let’s get out,” whispered Jordan, after a somehow wasteful and
inappropriate half-hour; “this is much too polite for me.”

We got up, and she explained that we were going to find the host: I
had never met him, she said, and it was making me uneasy. The
undergraduate nodded in a cynical, melancholy way.

The bar, where we glanced first, was crowded, but Gatsby was not
there. She couldn’t find him from the top of the steps, and he wasn’t
on the veranda. On a chance we tried an important-looking door, and
walked into a high Gothic library, panelled with carved English oak,
and probably transported complete from some ruin overseas.

A stout, middle-aged man, with enormous owl-eyed spectacles, was
sitting somewhat drunk on the edge of a great table, staring with
unsteady concentration at the shelves of books. As we entered he
wheeled excitedly around and examined Jordan from head to foot.

“What do you think?” he demanded impetuously.

“About what?”

He waved his hand toward the bookshelves.

“About that. As a matter of fact you needn’t bother to ascertain. I
ascertained. They’re real.”

“The books?”

He nodded.

“Absolutely real—have pages and everything. I thought they’d be a nice
durable cardboard. Matter of fact, they’re absolutely real.  Pages
and—Here! Lemme show you.”

Taking our scepticism for granted, he rushed to the bookcases and
returned with Volume One of the Stoddard Lectures.

“See!” he cried triumphantly. “It’s a bona-fide piece of printed
matter. It fooled me. This fella’s a regular Belasco. It’s a
triumph. What thoroughness! What realism! Knew when to stop,
too—didn’t cut the pages. But what do you want? What do you expect?”

He snatched the book from me and replaced it hastily on its shelf,
muttering that if one brick was removed the whole library was liable
to collapse.

“Who brought you?” he demanded. “Or did you just come? I was brought.
Most people were brought.”

Jordan looked at him alertly, cheerfully, without answering.

“I was brought by a woman named Roosevelt,” he continued. “Mrs. Claud
Roosevelt. Do you know her? I met her somewhere last night. I’ve been
drunk for about a week now, and I thought it might sober me up to sit
in a library.”

“Has it?”

“A little bit, I think. I can’t tell yet. I’ve only been here an hour.
Did I tell you about the books? They’re real. They’re—”

“You told us.”

We shook hands with him gravely and went back outdoors.

There was dancing now on the canvas in the garden; old men pushing
young girls backward in eternal graceless circles, superior couples
holding each other tortuously, fashionably, and keeping in the
corners—and a great number of single girls dancing individually or
relieving the orchestra for a moment of the burden of the banjo or the
traps. By midnight the hilarity had increased. A celebrated tenor had
sung in Italian, and a notorious contralto had sung in jazz, and
between the numbers people were doing “stunts” all over the garden,
while happy, vacuous bursts of laughter rose toward the summer sky. A
pair of stage twins, who turned out to be the girls in yellow, did a
baby act in costume, and champagne was served in glasses bigger than
finger-bowls. The moon had risen higher, and floating in the Sound was
a triangle of silver scales, trembling a little to the stiff, tinny
drip of the banjoes on the lawn.

I was still with Jordan Baker. We were sitting at a table with a man
of about my age and a rowdy little girl, who gave way upon the
slightest provocation to uncontrollable laughter. I was enjoying
myself now. I had taken two finger-bowls of champagne, and the scene
had changed before my eyes into something significant, elemental, and
profound.

At a lull in the entertainment the man looked at me and smiled.

“Your face is familiar,” he said politely. “Weren’t you in the First
Division during the war?”

“Why yes. I was in the Twenty-eighth Infantry.”

“I was in the Sixteenth until June nineteen-eighteen. I knew I’d seen
you somewhere before.”

We talked for a moment about some wet, grey little villages in France.
Evidently he lived in this vicinity, for he told me that he had just
bought a hydroplane, and was going to try it out in the morning.

“Want to go with me, old sport? Just near the shore along the Sound.”

“What time?”

“Any time that suits you best.”

It was on the tip of my tongue to ask his name when Jordan looked
around and smiled.

“Having a gay time now?” she inquired.

“Much better.” I turned again to my new acquaintance. “This is an
unusual party for me. I haven’t even seen the host. I live over
there—” I waved my hand at the invisible hedge in the distance, “and
this man Gatsby sent over his chauffeur with an invitation.”

For a moment he looked at me as if he failed to understand.

“I’m Gatsby,” he said suddenly.

“What!” I exclaimed. “Oh, I beg your pardon.”

“I thought you knew, old sport. I’m afraid I’m not a very good host.”

He smiled understandingly—much more than understandingly. It was one
of those rare smiles with a quality of eternal reassurance in it, that
you may come across four or five times in life. It faced—or seemed to
face—the whole eternal world for an instant, and then concentrated on
you with an irresistible prejudice in your favour. It understood you
just so far as you wanted to be understood, believed in you as you
would like to believe in yourself, and assured you that it had
precisely the impression of you that, at your best, you hoped to
convey. Precisely at that point it vanished—and I was looking at an
elegant young roughneck, a year or two over thirty, whose elaborate
formality of speech just missed being absurd. Some time before he
introduced himself I’d got a strong impression that he was picking his
words with care.

Almost at the moment when Mr. Gatsby identified himself a butler
hurried toward him with the information that Chicago was calling him
on the wire. He excused himself with a small bow that included each of
us in turn.

“If you want anything just ask for it, old sport,” he urged me.
“Excuse me. I will rejoin you later.”

When he was gone I turned immediately to Jordan—constrained to assure
her of my surprise. I had expected that Mr. Gatsby would be a florid
and corpulent person in his middle years.

“Who is he?” I demanded. “Do you know?”

“He’s just a man named Gatsby.”

“Where is he from, I mean? And what does he do?”

“Now you’re started on the subject,” she answered with a wan smile.
“Well, he told me once he was an Oxford man.”

A dim background started to take shape behind him, but at her next
remark it faded away.

“However, I don’t believe it.”

“Why not?”

“I don’t know,” she insisted, “I just don’t think he went there.”

Something in her tone reminded me of the other girl’s “I think he
killed a man,” and had the effect of stimulating my curiosity. I would
have accepted without question the information that Gatsby sprang from
the swamps of Louisiana or from the lower East Side of New York. That
was comprehensible. But young men didn’t—at least in my provincial
inexperience I believed they didn’t—drift coolly out of nowhere and
buy a palace on Long Island Sound.

“Anyhow, he gives large parties,” said Jordan, changing the subject
with an urban distaste for the concrete. “And I like large parties.
They’re so intimate. At small parties there isn’t any privacy.”

There was the boom of a bass drum, and the voice of the orchestra
leader rang out suddenly above the echolalia of the garden.

“Ladies and gentlemen,” he cried. “At the request of Mr. Gatsby we are
going to play for you Mr. Vladmir Tostoff’s latest work, which
attracted so much attention at Carnegie Hall last May. If you read the
papers you know there was a big sensation.” He smiled with jovial
condescension, and added: “Some sensation!” Whereupon everybody
laughed.

“The piece is known,” he concluded lustily, “as ‘Vladmir Tostoff’s
Jazz History of the World!’ ”

The nature of Mr. Tostoff’s composition eluded me, because just as it
began my eyes fell on Gatsby, standing alone on the marble steps and
looking from one group to another with approving eyes. His tanned skin
was drawn attractively tight on his face and his short hair looked as
though it were trimmed every day. I could see nothing sinister about
him. I wondered if the fact that he was not drinking helped to set him
off from his guests, for it seemed to me that he grew more correct as
the fraternal hilarity increased. When the “Jazz History of the World”
was over, girls were putting their heads on men’s shoulders in a
puppyish, convivial way, girls were swooning backward playfully into
men’s arms, even into groups, knowing that someone would arrest their
falls—but no one swooned backward on Gatsby, and no French bob touched
Gatsby’s shoulder, and no singing quartets were formed with Gatsby’s
head for one link.

“I beg your pardon.”

Gatsby’s butler was suddenly standing beside us.

“Miss Baker?” he inquired. “I beg your pardon, but Mr. Gatsby would
like to speak to you alone.”

“With me?” she exclaimed in surprise.

“Yes, madame.”

She got up slowly, raising her eyebrows at me in astonishment, and
followed the butler toward the house. I noticed that she wore her
evening-dress, all her dresses, like sports clothes—there was a
jauntiness about her movements as if she had first learned to walk
upon golf courses on clean, crisp mornings.

I was alone and it was almost two. For some time confused and
intriguing sounds had issued from a long, many-windowed room which
overhung the terrace. Eluding Jordan’s undergraduate, who was now
engaged in an obstetrical conversation with two chorus girls, and who
implored me to join him, I went inside.

The large room was full of people. One of the girls in yellow was
playing the piano, and beside her stood a tall, red-haired young lady
from a famous chorus, engaged in song. She had drunk a quantity of
champagne, and during the course of her song she had decided, ineptly,
that everything was very, very sad—she was not only singing, she was
weeping too. Whenever there was a pause in the song she filled it with
gasping, broken sobs, and then took up the lyric again in a quavering
soprano. The tears coursed down her cheeks—not freely, however, for
when they came into contact with her heavily beaded eyelashes they
assumed an inky colour, and pursued the rest of their way in slow
black rivulets. A humorous suggestion was made that she sing the notes
on her face, whereupon she threw up her hands, sank into a chair, and
went off into a deep vinous sleep.

“She had a fight with a man who says he’s her husband,” explained a
girl at my elbow.

I looked around. Most of the remaining women were now having fights
with men said to be their husbands. Even Jordan’s party, the quartet
from East Egg, were rent asunder by dissension. One of the men was
talking with curious intensity to a young actress, and his wife, after
attempting to laugh at the situation in a dignified and indifferent
way, broke down entirely and resorted to flank attacks—at intervals
she appeared suddenly at his side like an angry diamond, and hissed:
“You promised!” into his ear.

The reluctance to go home was not confined to wayward men. The hall
was at present occupied by two deplorably sober men and their highly
indignant wives. The wives were sympathizing with each other in
slightly raised voices.

“Whenever he sees I’m having a good time he wants to go home.”

“Never heard anything so selfish in my life.”

“We’re always the first ones to leave.”

“So are we.”

“Well, we’re almost the last tonight,” said one of the men sheepishly.
“The orchestra left half an hour ago.”

In spite of the wives’ agreement that such malevolence was beyond
credibility, the dispute ended in a short struggle, and both wives
were lifted, kicking, into the night.

As I waited for my hat in the hall the door of the library opened and
Jordan Baker and Gatsby came out together. He was saying some last
word to her, but the eagerness in his manner tightened abruptly into
formality as several people approached him to say goodbye.

Jordan’s party were calling impatiently to her from the porch, but she
lingered for a moment to shake hands.

“I’ve just heard the most amazing thing,” she whispered. “How long
were we in there?”

“Why, about an hour.”

“It was … simply amazing,” she repeated abstractedly. “But I swore I
wouldn’t tell it and here I am tantalizing you.” She yawned gracefully
in my face. “Please come and see me … Phone book … Under the name of
Mrs. Sigourney Howard … My aunt …” She was hurrying off as she
talked—her brown hand waved a jaunty salute as she melted into her
party at the door.

Rather ashamed that on my first appearance I had stayed so late, I
joined the last of Gatsby’s guests, who were clustered around him. I
wanted to explain that I’d hunted for him early in the evening and to
apologize for not having known him in the garden.

“Don’t mention it,” he enjoined me eagerly. “Don’t give it another
thought, old sport.” The familiar expression held no more familiarity
than the hand which reassuringly brushed my shoulder. “And don’t
forget we’re going up in the hydroplane tomorrow morning, at nine
o’clock.”

Then the butler, behind his shoulder:

“Philadelphia wants you on the phone, sir.”

“All right, in a minute. Tell them I’ll be right there … Good night.”

“Good night.”

“Good night.” He smiled—and suddenly there seemed to be a pleasant
significance in having been among the last to go, as if he had desired
it all the time. “Good night, old sport … Good night.”

But as I walked down the steps I saw that the evening was not quite
over. Fifty feet from the door a dozen headlights illuminated a
bizarre and tumultuous scene. In the ditch beside the road, right side
up, but violently shorn of one wheel, rested a new coupé which had
left Gatsby’s drive not two minutes before. The sharp jut of a wall
accounted for the detachment of the wheel, which was now getting
considerable attention from half a dozen curious chauffeurs. However,
as they had left their cars blocking the road, a harsh, discordant din
from those in the rear had been audible for some time, and added to
the already violent confusion of the scene.

A man in a long duster had dismounted from the wreck and now stood in
the middle of the road, looking from the car to the tyre and from the
tyre to the observers in a pleasant, puzzled way.

“See!” he explained. “It went in the ditch.”

The fact was infinitely astonishing to him, and I recognized first the
unusual quality of wonder, and then the man—it was the late patron of
Gatsby’s library.

“How’d it happen?”

He shrugged his shoulders.

“I know nothing whatever about mechanics,” he said decisively.

“But how did it happen? Did you run into the wall?”

“Don’t ask me,” said Owl Eyes, washing his hands of the whole
matter. “I know very little about driving—next to nothing. It
happened, and that’s all I know.”

“Well, if you’re a poor driver you oughtn’t to try driving at night.”

“But I wasn’t even trying,” he explained indignantly, “I wasn’t even
trying.”

An awed hush fell upon the bystanders.

“Do you want to commit suicide?”

“You’re lucky it was just a wheel! A bad driver and not even trying!”

“You don’t understand,” explained the criminal. “I wasn’t driving.
There’s another man in the car.”

The shock that followed this declaration found voice in a sustained
“Ah-h-h!” as the door of the coupé swung slowly open. The crowd—it was
now a crowd—stepped back involuntarily, and when the door had opened
wide there was a ghostly pause. Then, very gradually, part by part, a
pale, dangling individual stepped out of the wreck, pawing tentatively
at the ground with a large uncertain dancing shoe.

Blinded by the glare of the headlights and confused by the incessant
groaning of the horns, the apparition stood swaying for a moment
before he perceived the man in the duster.

“Wha’s matter?” he inquired calmly. “Did we run outa gas?”

“Look!”

Half a dozen fingers pointed at the amputated wheel—he stared at it
for a moment, and then looked upward as though he suspected that it
had dropped from the sky.

“It came off,” someone explained.

He nodded.

“At first I din’ notice we’d stopped.”

A pause. Then, taking a long breath and straightening his shoulders,
he remarked in a determined voice:

“Wonder’ff tell me where there’s a gas’line station?”

At least a dozen men, some of them a little better off than he was,
explained to him that wheel and car were no longer joined by any
physical bond.

“Back out,” he suggested after a moment. “Put her in reverse.”

“But the wheel’s off!”

He hesitated.

“No harm in trying,” he said.

The caterwauling horns had reached a crescendo and I turned away and
cut across the lawn toward home. I glanced back once. A wafer of a
moon was shining over Gatsby’s house, making the night fine as before,
and surviving the laughter and the sound of his still glowing garden.
A sudden emptiness seemed to flow now from the windows and the great
doors, endowing with complete isolation the figure of the host, who
stood on the porch, his hand up in a formal gesture of farewell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reading over what I have written so far, I see I have given the
impression that the events of three nights several weeks apart were
all that absorbed me. On the contrary, they were merely casual events
in a crowded summer, and, until much later, they absorbed me
infinitely less than my personal affairs.

Most of the time I worked. In the early morning the sun threw my
shadow westward as I hurried down the white chasms of lower New York
to the Probity Trust. I knew the other clerks and young bond-salesmen
by their first names, and lunched with them in dark, crowded
restaurants on little pig sausages and mashed potatoes and coffee. I
even had a short affair with a girl who lived in Jersey City and
worked in the accounting department, but her brother began throwing
mean looks in my direction, so when she went on her vacation in July I
let it blow quietly away.

I took dinner usually at the Yale Club—for some reason it was the
gloomiest event of my day—and then I went upstairs to the library and
studied investments and securities for a conscientious hour. There
were generally a few rioters around, but they never came into the
library, so it was a good place to work. After that, if the night was
mellow, I strolled down Madison Avenue past the old Murray Hill Hotel,
and over 33rd Street to the Pennsylvania Station.

I began to like New York, the racy, adventurous feel of it at night,
and the satisfaction that the constant flicker of men and women and
machines gives to the restless eye. I liked to walk up Fifth Avenue
and pick out romantic women from the crowd and imagine that in a few
minutes I was going to enter into their lives, and no one would ever
know or disapprove. Sometimes, in my mind, I followed them to their
apartments on the corners of hidden streets, and they turned and
smiled back at me before they faded through a door into warm
darkness. At the enchanted metropolitan twilight I felt a haunting
loneliness sometimes, and felt it in others—poor young clerks who
loitered in front of windows waiting until it was time for a solitary
restaurant dinner—young clerks in the dusk, wasting the most poignant
moments of night and life.

Again at eight o’clock, when the dark lanes of the Forties were lined
five deep with throbbing taxicabs, bound for the theatre district, I
felt a sinking in my heart. Forms leaned together in the taxis as they
waited, and voices sang, and there was laughter from unheard jokes,
and lighted cigarettes made unintelligible circles inside. Imagining
that I, too, was hurrying towards gaiety and sharing their intimate
excitement, I wished them well.

For a while I lost sight of Jordan Baker, and then in midsummer I
found her again. At first I was flattered to go places with her,
because she was a golf champion, and everyone knew her name. Then it
was something more. I wasn’t actually in love, but I felt a sort of
tender curiosity. The bored haughty face that she turned to the world
concealed something—most affectations conceal something eventually,
even though they don’t in the beginning—and one day I found what it
was. When we were on a house-party together up in Warwick, she left a
borrowed car out in the rain with the top down, and then lied about
it—and suddenly I remembered the story about her that had eluded me
that night at Daisy’s. At her first big golf tournament there was a
row that nearly reached the newspapers—a suggestion that she had moved
her ball from a bad lie in the semifinal round. The thing approached
the proportions of a scandal—then died away. A caddy retracted his
statement, and the only other witness admitted that he might have been
mistaken. The incident and the name had remained together in my mind.

Jordan Baker instinctively avoided clever, shrewd men, and now I saw
that this was because she felt safer on a plane where any divergence
from a code would be thought impossible. She was incurably dishonest.
She wasn’t able to endure being at a disadvantage and, given this
unwillingness, I suppose she had begun dealing in subterfuges when she
was very young in order to keep that cool, insolent smile turned to
the world and yet satisfy the demands of her hard, jaunty body.

It made no difference to me. Dishonesty in a woman is a thing you
never blame deeply—I was casually sorry, and then I forgot. It was on
that same house-party that we had a curious conversation about driving
a car. It started because she passed so close to some workmen that our
fender flicked a button on one man’s coat.

“You’re a rotten driver,” I protested. “Either you ought to be more
careful, or you oughtn’t to drive at all.”

“I am careful.”

“No, you’re not.”

“Well, other people are,” she said lightly.

“What’s that got to do with it?”

“They’ll keep out of my way,” she insisted. “It takes two to make an
accident.”

“Suppose you met somebody just as careless as yourself.”

“I hope I never will,” she answered. “I hate careless people. That’s
why I like you.”

Her grey, sun-strained eyes stared straight ahead, but she had
deliberately shifted our relations, and for a moment I thought I loved
her. But I am slow-thinking and full of interior rules that act as
brakes on my desires, and I knew that first I had to get myself
definitely out of that tangle back home. I’d been writing letters once
a week and signing them: “Love, Nick,” and all I could think of was
how, when that certain girl played tennis, a faint moustache of
perspiration appeared on her upper lip. Nevertheless there was a vague
understanding that had to be tactfully broken off before I was free.

Everyone suspects himself of at least one of the cardinal virtues, and
this is mine: I am one of the few honest people that I have ever
known.


                                  IV

On Sunday morning while church bells rang in the villages alongshore,
the world and its mistress returned to Gatsby’s house and twinkled
hilariously on his lawn.

“He’s a bootlegger,” said the young ladies, moving somewhere between
his cocktails and his flowers. “One time he killed a man who had found
out that he was nephew to Von Hindenburg and second cousin to the
devil. Reach me a rose, honey, and pour me a last drop into that there
crystal glass.”

Once I wrote down on the empty spaces of a timetable the names of
those who came to Gatsby’s house that summer. It is an old timetable
now, disintegrating at its folds, and headed “This schedule in effect
July 5th, 1922.” But I can still read the grey names, and they will
give you a better impression than my generalities of those who
accepted Gatsby’s hospitality and paid him the subtle tribute of
knowing nothing whatever about him.

From East Egg, then, came the Chester Beckers and the Leeches, and a
man named Bunsen, whom I knew at Yale, and Doctor Webster Civet, who
was drowned last summer up in Maine. And the Hornbeams and the Willie
Voltaires, and a whole clan named Blackbuck, who always gathered in a
corner and flipped up their noses like goats at whosoever came
near. And the Ismays and the Chrysties (or rather Hubert Auerbach and
Mr. Chrystie’s wife), and Edgar Beaver, whose hair, they say, turned
cotton-white one winter afternoon for no good reason at all.

Clarence Endive was from East Egg, as I remember. He came only once,
in white knickerbockers, and had a fight with a bum named Etty in the
garden. From farther out on the Island came the Cheadles and the O.
R. P. Schraeders, and the Stonewall Jackson Abrams of Georgia, and the
Fishguards and the Ripley Snells. Snell was there three days before he
went to the penitentiary, so drunk out on the gravel drive that
Mrs. Ulysses Swett’s automobile ran over his right hand. The Dancies
came, too, and S. B. Whitebait, who was well over sixty, and Maurice
A. Flink, and the Hammerheads, and Beluga the tobacco importer, and
Beluga’s girls.

From West Egg came the Poles and the Mulreadys and Cecil Roebuck and
Cecil Schoen and Gulick the State senator and Newton Orchid, who
controlled Films Par Excellence, and Eckhaust and Clyde Cohen and Don
S. Schwartz (the son) and Arthur McCarty, all connected with the
movies in one way or another. And the Catlips and the Bembergs and G.
Earl Muldoon, brother to that Muldoon who afterward strangled his
wife. Da Fontano the promoter came there, and Ed Legros and James B.
(“Rot-Gut”) Ferret and the De Jongs and Ernest Lilly—they came to
gamble, and when Ferret wandered into the garden it meant he was
cleaned out and Associated Traction would have to fluctuate profitably
next day.

A man named Klipspringer was there so often that he became known as
“the boarder”—I doubt if he had any other home. Of theatrical people
there were Gus Waize and Horace O’Donavan and Lester Myer and George
Duckweed and Francis Bull. Also from New York were the Chromes and the
Backhyssons and the Dennickers and Russel Betty and the Corrigans and
the Kellehers and the Dewars and the Scullys and S. W. Belcher and the
Smirkes and the young Quinns, divorced now, and Henry L. Palmetto, who
killed himself by jumping in front of a subway train in Times Square.

Benny McClenahan arrived always with four girls. They were never quite
the same ones in physical person, but they were so identical one with
another that it inevitably seemed they had been there before. I have
forgotten their names—Jaqueline, I think, or else Consuela, or Gloria
or Judy or June, and their last names were either the melodious names
of flowers and months or the sterner ones of the great American
capitalists whose cousins, if pressed, they would confess themselves
to be.

In addition to all these I can remember that Faustina O’Brien came
there at least once and the Baedeker girls and young Brewer, who had
his nose shot off in the war, and Mr. Albrucksburger and Miss Haag,
his fiancée, and Ardita Fitz-Peters and Mr. P. Jewett, once head of
the American Legion, and Miss Claudia Hip, with a man reputed to be
her chauffeur, and a prince of something, whom we called Duke, and
whose name, if I ever knew it, I have forgotten.

All these people came to Gatsby’s house in the summer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

At nine o’clock, one morning late in July, Gatsby’s gorgeous car
lurched up the rocky drive to my door and gave out a burst of melody
from its three-noted horn.

It was the first time he had called on me, though I had gone to two of
his parties, mounted in his hydroplane, and, at his urgent invitation,
made frequent use of his beach.

“Good morning, old sport. You’re having lunch with me today and I
thought we’d ride up together.”

He was balancing himself on the dashboard of his car with that
resourcefulness of movement that is so peculiarly American—that comes,
I suppose, with the absence of lifting work in youth and, even more,
with the formless grace of our nervous, sporadic games. This quality
was continually breaking through his punctilious manner in the shape
of restlessness. He was never quite still; there was always a tapping
foot somewhere or the impatient opening and closing of a hand.

He saw me looking with admiration at his car.

“It’s pretty, isn’t it, old sport?” He jumped off to give me a better
view. “Haven’t you ever seen it before?”

I’d seen it. Everybody had seen it. It was a rich cream colour, bright
with nickel, swollen here and there in its monstrous length with
triumphant hatboxes and supper-boxes and toolboxes, and terraced with
a labyrinth of windshields that mirrored a dozen suns. Sitting down
behind many layers of glass in a sort of green leather conservatory,
we started to town.

I had talked with him perhaps half a dozen times in the past month and
found, to my disappointment, that he had little to say. So my first
impression, that he was a person of some undefined consequence, had
gradually faded and he had become simply the proprietor of an
elaborate roadhouse next door.

And then came that disconcerting ride. We hadn’t reached West Egg
village before Gatsby began leaving his elegant sentences unfinished
and slapping himself indecisively on the knee of his caramel-coloured
suit.

“Look here, old sport,” he broke out surprisingly, “what’s your
opinion of me, anyhow?”

A little overwhelmed, I began the generalized evasions which that
question deserves.

“Well, I’m going to tell you something about my life,” he interrupted.
“I don’t want you to get a wrong idea of me from all these stories you
hear.”

So he was aware of the bizarre accusations that flavoured conversation
in his halls.

“I’ll tell you God’s truth.” His right hand suddenly ordered divine
retribution to stand by. “I am the son of some wealthy people in the
Middle West—all dead now. I was brought up in America but educated at
Oxford, because all my ancestors have been educated there for many
years. It is a family tradition.”

He looked at me sideways—and I knew why Jordan Baker had believed he
was lying. He hurried the phrase “educated at Oxford,” or swallowed
it, or choked on it, as though it had bothered him before. And with
this doubt, his whole statement fell to pieces, and I wondered if
there wasn’t something a little sinister about him, after all.

“What part of the Middle West?” I inquired casually.

“San Francisco.”

“I see.”

“My family all died and I came into a good deal of money.”

His voice was solemn, as if the memory of that sudden extinction of a
clan still haunted him. For a moment I suspected that he was pulling
my leg, but a glance at him convinced me otherwise.

“After that I lived like a young rajah in all the capitals of
Europe—Paris, Venice, Rome—collecting jewels, chiefly rubies, hunting
big game, painting a little, things for myself only, and trying to
forget something very sad that had happened to me long ago.”

With an effort I managed to restrain my incredulous laughter. The very
phrases were worn so threadbare that they evoked no image except that
of a turbaned “character” leaking sawdust at every pore as he pursued
a tiger through the Bois de Boulogne.

“Then came the war, old sport. It was a great relief, and I tried very
hard to die, but I seemed to bear an enchanted life. I accepted a
commission as first lieutenant when it began. In the Argonne Forest I
took the remains of my machine-gun battalion so far forward that there
was a half mile gap on either side of us where the infantry couldn’t
advance. We stayed there two days and two nights, a hundred and thirty
men with sixteen Lewis guns, and when the infantry came up at last
they found the insignia of three German divisions among the piles of
dead. I was promoted to be a major, and every Allied government gave
me a decoration—even Montenegro, little Montenegro down on the
Adriatic Sea!”

Little Montenegro! He lifted up the words and nodded at them—with his
smile. The smile comprehended Montenegro’s troubled history and
sympathized with the brave struggles of the Montenegrin people. It
appreciated fully the chain of national circumstances which had
elicited this tribute from Montenegro’s warm little heart. My
incredulity was submerged in fascination now; it was like skimming
hastily through a dozen magazines.

He reached in his pocket, and a piece of metal, slung on a ribbon,
fell into my palm.

“That’s the one from Montenegro.”

To my astonishment, the thing had an authentic look. “Orderi di
Danilo,” ran the circular legend, “Montenegro, Nicolas Rex.”

“Turn it.”

“Major Jay Gatsby,” I read, “For Valour Extraordinary.”

“Here’s another thing I always carry. A souvenir of Oxford days. It
was taken in Trinity Quad—the man on my left is now the Earl of
Doncaster.”

It was a photograph of half a dozen young men in blazers loafing in an
archway through which were visible a host of spires. There was Gatsby,
looking a little, not much, younger—with a cricket bat in his hand.

Then it was all true. I saw the skins of tigers flaming in his palace
on the Grand Canal; I saw him opening a chest of rubies to ease, with
their crimson-lighted depths, the gnawings of his broken heart.

“I’m going to make a big request of you today,” he said, pocketing his
souvenirs with satisfaction, “so I thought you ought to know something
about me. I didn’t want you to think I was just some nobody. You see,
I usually find myself among strangers because I drift here and there
trying to forget the sad things that happened to me.” He hesitated.
“You’ll hear about it this afternoon.”

“At lunch?”

“No, this afternoon. I happened to find out that you’re taking Miss
Baker to tea.”

“Do you mean you’re in love with Miss Baker?”

“No, old sport, I’m not. But Miss Baker has kindly consented to speak
to you about this matter.”

I hadn’t the faintest idea what “this matter” was, but I was more
annoyed than interested. I hadn’t asked Jordan to tea in order to
discuss Mr. Jay Gatsby. I was sure the request would be something
utterly fantastic, and for a moment I was sorry I’d ever set foot upon
his overpopulated lawn.

He wouldn’t say another word. His correctness grew on him as we neared
the city. We passed Port Roosevelt, where there was a glimpse of
red-belted oceangoing ships, and sped along a cobbled slum lined with
the dark, undeserted saloons of the faded-gilt nineteen-hundreds.
Then the valley of ashes opened out on both sides of us, and I had a
glimpse of Mrs. Wilson straining at the garage pump with panting
vitality as we went by.

With fenders spread like wings we scattered light through half
Astoria—only half, for as we twisted among the pillars of the elevated
I heard the familiar “jug-jug-spat!” of a motorcycle, and a frantic
policeman rode alongside.

“All right, old sport,” called Gatsby. We slowed down. Taking a white
card from his wallet, he waved it before the man’s eyes.

“Right you are,” agreed the policeman, tipping his cap. “Know you next
time, Mr. Gatsby. Excuse me!”

“What was that?” I inquired. “The picture of Oxford?”

“I was able to do the commissioner a favour once, and he sends me a
Christmas card every year.”

Over the great bridge, with the sunlight through the girders making a
constant flicker upon the moving cars, with the city rising up across
the river in white heaps and sugar lumps all built with a wish out of
nonolfactory money. The city seen from the Queensboro Bridge is always
the city seen for the first time, in its first wild promise of all the
mystery and the beauty in the world.

A dead man passed us in a hearse heaped with blooms, followed by two
carriages with drawn blinds, and by more cheerful carriages for
friends. The friends looked out at us with the tragic eyes and short
upper lips of southeastern Europe, and I was glad that the sight of
Gatsby’s splendid car was included in their sombre holiday. As we
crossed Blackwell’s Island a limousine passed us, driven by a white
chauffeur, in which sat three modish negroes, two bucks and a girl. I
laughed aloud as the yolks of their eyeballs rolled toward us in
haughty rivalry.

“Anything can happen now that we’ve slid over this bridge,” I thought;
“anything at all …”

Even Gatsby could happen, without any particular wonder.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Roaring noon. In a well-fanned Forty-second Street cellar I met Gatsby
for lunch. Blinking away the brightness of the street outside, my eyes
picked him out obscurely in the anteroom, talking to another man.

“Mr. Carraway, this is my friend Mr. Wolfshiem.”

A small, flat-nosed Jew raised his large head and regarded me with two
fine growths of hair which luxuriated in either nostril. After a
moment I discovered his tiny eyes in the half-darkness.

“—So I took one look at him,” said Mr. Wolfshiem, shaking my hand
earnestly, “and what do you think I did?”

“What?” I inquired politely.

But evidently he was not addressing me, for he dropped my hand and
covered Gatsby with his expressive nose.

“I handed the money to Katspaugh and I said: ‘All right, Katspaugh,
don’t pay him a penny till he shuts his mouth.’ He shut it then and
there.”

Gatsby took an arm of each of us and moved forward into the
restaurant, whereupon Mr. Wolfshiem swallowed a new sentence he was
starting and lapsed into a somnambulatory abstraction.

“Highballs?” asked the head waiter.

“This is a nice restaurant here,” said Mr. Wolfshiem, looking at the
presbyterian nymphs on the ceiling. “But I like across the street
better!”

“Yes, highballs,” agreed Gatsby, and then to Mr. Wolfshiem: “It’s too
hot over there.”

“Hot and small—yes,” said Mr. Wolfshiem, “but full of memories.”

“What place is that?” I asked.

“The old Metropole.”

“The old Metropole,” brooded Mr. Wolfshiem gloomily. “Filled with
faces dead and gone. Filled with friends gone now forever. I can’t
forget so long as I live the night they shot Rosy Rosenthal there. It
was six of us at the table, and Rosy had eat and drunk a lot all
evening. When it was almost morning the waiter came up to him with a
funny look and says somebody wants to speak to him outside. ‘All
right,’ says Rosy, and begins to get up, and I pulled him down in his
chair.

“ ‘Let the bastards come in here if they want you, Rosy, but don’t
you, so help me, move outside this room.’

“It was four o’clock in the morning then, and if we’d of raised the
blinds we’d of seen daylight.”

“Did he go?” I asked innocently.

“Sure he went.” Mr. Wolfshiem’s nose flashed at me indignantly. “He
turned around in the door and says: ‘Don’t let that waiter take away
my coffee!’ Then he went out on the sidewalk, and they shot him three
times in his full belly and drove away.”

“Four of them were electrocuted,” I said, remembering.

“Five, with Becker.” His nostrils turned to me in an interested way.
“I understand you’re looking for a business gonnegtion.”

The juxtaposition of these two remarks was startling. Gatsby answered
for me:

“Oh, no,” he exclaimed, “this isn’t the man.”

“No?” Mr. Wolfshiem seemed disappointed.

“This is just a friend. I told you we’d talk about that some other
time.”

“I beg your pardon,” said Mr. Wolfshiem, “I had a wrong man.”

A succulent hash arrived, and Mr. Wolfshiem, forgetting the more
sentimental atmosphere of the old Metropole, began to eat with
ferocious delicacy. His eyes, meanwhile, roved very slowly all around
the room—he completed the arc by turning to inspect the people
directly behind. I think that, except for my presence, he would have
taken one short glance beneath our own table.

“Look here, old sport,” said Gatsby, leaning toward me, “I’m afraid I
made you a little angry this morning in the car.”

There was the smile again, but this time I held out against it.

“I don’t like mysteries,” I answered, “and I don’t understand why you
won’t come out frankly and tell me what you want. Why has it all got
to come through Miss Baker?”

“Oh, it’s nothing underhand,” he assured me. “Miss Baker’s a great
sportswoman, you know, and she’d never do anything that wasn’t all
right.”

Suddenly he looked at his watch, jumped up, and hurried from the room,
leaving me with Mr. Wolfshiem at the table.

“He has to telephone,” said Mr. Wolfshiem, following him with his
eyes. “Fine fellow, isn’t he? Handsome to look at and a perfect
gentleman.”

“Yes.”

“He’s an Oggsford man.”

“Oh!”

“He went to Oggsford College in England. You know Oggsford College?”

“I’ve heard of it.”

“It’s one of the most famous colleges in the world.”

“Have you known Gatsby for a long time?” I inquired.

“Several years,” he answered in a gratified way. “I made the pleasure
of his acquaintance just after the war. But I knew I had discovered a
man of fine breeding after I talked with him an hour. I said to
myself: ‘There’s the kind of man you’d like to take home and introduce
to your mother and sister.’ ” He paused. “I see you’re looking at my
cuff buttons.”

I hadn’t been looking at them, but I did now. They were composed of
oddly familiar pieces of ivory.

“Finest specimens of human molars,” he informed me.

“Well!” I inspected them. “That’s a very interesting idea.”

“Yeah.” He flipped his sleeves up under his coat. “Yeah, Gatsby’s very
careful about women. He would never so much as look at a friend’s
wife.”

When the subject of this instinctive trust returned to the table and
sat down Mr. Wolfshiem drank his coffee with a jerk and got to his
feet.

“I have enjoyed my lunch,” he said, “and I’m going to run off from you
two young men before I outstay my welcome.”

“Don’t hurry Meyer,” said Gatsby, without enthusiasm. Mr. Wolfshiem
raised his hand in a sort of benediction.

“You’re very polite, but I belong to another generation,” he announced
solemnly. “You sit here and discuss your sports and your young ladies
and your—” He supplied an imaginary noun with another wave of his
hand. “As for me, I am fifty years old, and I won’t impose myself on
you any longer.”

As he shook hands and turned away his tragic nose was trembling. I
wondered if I had said anything to offend him.

“He becomes very sentimental sometimes,” explained Gatsby. “This is
one of his sentimental days. He’s quite a character around New York—a
denizen of Broadway.”

“Who is he, anyhow, an actor?”

“No.”

“A dentist?”

“Meyer Wolfshiem? No, he’s a gambler.” Gatsby hesitated, then added,
coolly: “He’s the man who fixed the World’s Series back in 1919.”

“Fixed the World’s Series?” I repeated.

The idea staggered me. I remembered, of course, that the World’s
Series had been fixed in 1919, but if I had thought of it at all I
would have thought of it as a thing that merely happened, the end of
some inevitable chain. It never occurred to me that one man could
start to play with the faith of fifty million people—with the
single-mindedness of a burglar blowing a safe.

“How did he happen to do that?” I asked after a minute.

“He just saw the opportunity.”

“Why isn’t he in jail?”

“They can’t get him, old sport. He’s a smart man.”

I insisted on paying the check. As the waiter brought my change I
caught sight of Tom Buchanan across the crowded room.

“Come along with me for a minute,” I said; “I’ve got to say hello to
someone.”

When he saw us Tom jumped up and took half a dozen steps in our
direction.

“Where’ve you been?” he demanded eagerly. “Daisy’s furious because you
haven’t called up.”

“This is Mr. Gatsby, Mr. Buchanan.”

They shook hands briefly, and a strained, unfamiliar look of
embarrassment came over Gatsby’s face.

“How’ve you been, anyhow?” demanded Tom of me. “How’d you happen to
come up this far to eat?”

“I’ve been having lunch with Mr. Gatsby.”

I turned toward Mr. Gatsby, but he was no longer there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

One October day in nineteen-seventeen—

(said Jordan Baker that afternoon, sitting up very straight on a
straight chair in the tea-garden at the Plaza Hotel)

—I was walking along from one place to another, half on the sidewalks
and half on the lawns. I was happier on the lawns because I had on
shoes from England with rubber knobs on the soles that bit into the
soft ground. I had on a new plaid skirt also that blew a little in the
wind, and whenever this happened the red, white, and blue banners in
front of all the houses stretched out stiff and said tut-tut-tut-tut,
in a disapproving way.

The largest of the banners and the largest of the lawns belonged to
Daisy Fay’s house. She was just eighteen, two years older than me, and
by far the most popular of all the young girls in Louisville. She
dressed in white, and had a little white roadster, and all day long
the telephone rang in her house and excited young officers from Camp
Taylor demanded the privilege of monopolizing her that
night. “Anyways, for an hour!”

When I came opposite her house that morning her white roadster was
beside the kerb, and she was sitting in it with a lieutenant I had
never seen before. They were so engrossed in each other that she
didn’t see me until I was five feet away.

“Hello, Jordan,” she called unexpectedly. “Please come here.”

I was flattered that she wanted to speak to me, because of all the
older girls I admired her most. She asked me if I was going to the Red
Cross to make bandages. I was. Well, then, would I tell them that she
couldn’t come that day? The officer looked at Daisy while she was
speaking, in a way that every young girl wants to be looked at
sometime, and because it seemed romantic to me I have remembered the
incident ever since. His name was Jay Gatsby, and I didn’t lay eyes on
him again for over four years—even after I’d met him on Long Island I
didn’t realize it was the same man.

That was nineteen-seventeen. By the next year I had a few beaux
myself, and I began to play in tournaments, so I didn’t see Daisy very
often. She went with a slightly older crowd—when she went with anyone
at all. Wild rumours were circulating about her—how her mother had
found her packing her bag one winter night to go to New York and say
goodbye to a soldier who was going overseas. She was effectually
prevented, but she wasn’t on speaking terms with her family for
several weeks. After that she didn’t play around with the soldiers any
more, but only with a few flat-footed, shortsighted young men in town,
who couldn’t get into the army at all.

By the next autumn she was gay again, gay as ever. She had a début
after the armistice, and in February she was presumably engaged to a
man from New Orleans. In June she married Tom Buchanan of Chicago,
with more pomp and circumstance than Louisville ever knew before. He
came down with a hundred people in four private cars, and hired a
whole floor of the Muhlbach Hotel, and the day before the wedding he
gave her a string of pearls valued at three hundred and fifty thousand
dollars.

I was a bridesmaid. I came into her room half an hour before the
bridal dinner, and found her lying on her bed as lovely as the June
night in her flowered dress—and as drunk as a monkey. She had a bottle
of Sauterne in one hand and a letter in the other.

“ ’Gratulate me,” she muttered. “Never had a drink before, but oh how
I do enjoy it.”

“What’s the matter, Daisy?”

I was scared, I can tell you; I’d never seen a girl like that before.

“Here, dearies.” She groped around in a wastebasket she had with her
on the bed and pulled out the string of pearls. “Take ’em downstairs
and give ’em back to whoever they belong to. Tell ’em all Daisy’s
change’ her mine. Say: ‘Daisy’s change’ her mine!’ ”

She began to cry—she cried and cried. I rushed out and found her
mother’s maid, and we locked the door and got her into a cold bath.
She wouldn’t let go of the letter. She took it into the tub with her
and squeezed it up in a wet ball, and only let me leave it in the
soap-dish when she saw that it was coming to pieces like snow.

But she didn’t say another word. We gave her spirits of ammonia and
put ice on her forehead and hooked her back into her dress, and half
an hour later, when we walked out of the room, the pearls were around
her neck and the incident was over. Next day at five o’clock she
married Tom Buchanan without so much as a shiver, and started off on a
three months’ trip to the South Seas.

I saw them in Santa Barbara when they came back, and I thought I’d
never seen a girl so mad about her husband. If he left the room for a
minute she’d look around uneasily, and say: “Where’s Tom gone?” and
wear the most abstracted expression until she saw him coming in the
door. She used to sit on the sand with his head in her lap by the
hour, rubbing her fingers over his eyes and looking at him with
unfathomable delight. It was touching to see them together—it made you
laugh in a hushed, fascinated way. That was in August. A week after I
left Santa Barbara Tom ran into a wagon on the Ventura road one night,
and ripped a front wheel off his car. The girl who was with him got
into the papers, too, because her arm was broken—she was one of the
chambermaids in the Santa Barbara Hotel.

The next April Daisy had her little girl, and they went to France for
a year. I saw them one spring in Cannes, and later in Deauville, and
then they came back to Chicago to settle down. Daisy was popular in
Chicago, as you know. They moved with a fast crowd, all of them young
and rich and wild, but she came out with an absolutely perfect
reputation. Perhaps because she doesn’t drink. It’s a great advantage
not to drink among hard-drinking people. You can hold your tongue and,
moreover, you can time any little irregularity of your own so that
everybody else is so blind that they don’t see or care. Perhaps Daisy
never went in for amour at all—and yet there’s something in that voice
of hers …

Well, about six weeks ago, she heard the name Gatsby for the first
time in years. It was when I asked you—do you remember?—if you knew
Gatsby in West Egg. After you had gone home she came into my room and
woke me up, and said: “What Gatsby?” and when I described him—I was
half asleep—she said in the strangest voice that it must be the man
she used to know. It wasn’t until then that I connected this Gatsby
with the officer in her white car.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When Jordan Baker had finished telling all this we had left the Plaza
for half an hour and were driving in a victoria through Central Park.
The sun had gone down behind the tall apartments of the movie stars in
the West Fifties, and the clear voices of children, already gathered
like crickets on the grass, rose through the hot twilight:

 “I’m the Sheik of Araby. Your love belongs to me. At night when
 you’re asleep Into your tent I’ll creep—”

“It was a strange coincidence,” I said.

“But it wasn’t a coincidence at all.”

“Why not?”

“Gatsby bought that house so that Daisy would be just across the bay.”

Then it had not been merely the stars to which he had aspired on that
June night. He came alive to me, delivered suddenly from the womb of
his purposeless splendour.

“He wants to know,” continued Jordan, “if you’ll invite Daisy to your
house some afternoon and then let him come over.”

The modesty of the demand shook me. He had waited five years and
bought a mansion where he dispensed starlight to casual moths—so that
he could “come over” some afternoon to a stranger’s garden.

“Did I have to know all this before he could ask such a little thing?”

“He’s afraid, he’s waited so long. He thought you might be
offended. You see, he’s regular tough underneath it all.”

Something worried me.

“Why didn’t he ask you to arrange a meeting?”

“He wants her to see his house,” she explained. “And your house is
right next door.”

“Oh!”

“I think he half expected her to wander into one of his parties, some
night,” went on Jordan, “but she never did. Then he began asking
people casually if they knew her, and I was the first one he found. It
was that night he sent for me at his dance, and you should have heard
the elaborate way he worked up to it. Of course, I immediately
suggested a luncheon in New York—and I thought he’d go mad:

“ ‘I don’t want to do anything out of the way!’ he kept saying. ‘I
want to see her right next door.’

“When I said you were a particular friend of Tom’s, he started to
abandon the whole idea. He doesn’t know very much about Tom, though he
says he’s read a Chicago paper for years just on the chance of
catching a glimpse of Daisy’s name.”

It was dark now, and as we dipped under a little bridge I put my arm
around Jordan’s golden shoulder and drew her toward me and asked her
to dinner. Suddenly I wasn’t thinking of Daisy and Gatsby any more,
but of this clean, hard, limited person, who dealt in universal
scepticism, and who leaned back jauntily just within the circle of my
arm. A phrase began to beat in my ears with a sort of heady
excitement: “There are only the pursued, the pursuing, the busy, and
the tired.”

“And Daisy ought to have something in her life,” murmured Jordan to
me.

“Does she want to see Gatsby?”

“She’s not to know about it. Gatsby doesn’t want her to know. You’re
just supposed to invite her to tea.”

We passed a barrier of dark trees, and then the façade of Fifty-Ninth
Street, a block of delicate pale light, beamed down into the park.
Unlike Gatsby and Tom Buchanan, I had no girl whose disembodied face
floated along the dark cornices and blinding signs, and so I drew up
the girl beside me, tightening my arms. Her wan, scornful mouth
smiled, and so I drew her up again closer, this time to my face.


                                  V

When I came home to West Egg that night I was afraid for a moment that
my house was on fire. Two o’clock and the whole corner of the
peninsula was blazing with light, which fell unreal on the shrubbery
and made thin elongating glints upon the roadside wires. Turning a
corner, I saw that it was Gatsby’s house, lit from tower to cellar.

At first I thought it was another party, a wild rout that had resolved
itself into “hide-and-go-seek” or “sardines-in-the-box” with all the
house thrown open to the game. But there wasn’t a sound. Only wind in
the trees, which blew the wires and made the lights go off and on
again as if the house had winked into the darkness. As my taxi groaned
away I saw Gatsby walking toward me across his lawn.

“Your place looks like the World’s Fair,” I said.

“Does it?” He turned his eyes toward it absently. “I have been
glancing into some of the rooms. Let’s go to Coney Island, old
sport. In my car.”

“It’s too late.”

“Well, suppose we take a plunge in the swimming pool? I haven’t made
use of it all summer.”

“I’ve got to go to bed.”

“All right.”

He waited, looking at me with suppressed eagerness.

“I talked with Miss Baker,” I said after a moment. “I’m going to call
up Daisy tomorrow and invite her over here to tea.”

“Oh, that’s all right,” he said carelessly. “I don’t want to put you
to any trouble.”

“What day would suit you?”

“What day would suit you?” he corrected me quickly. “I don’t want to
put you to any trouble, you see.”

“How about the day after tomorrow?”

He considered for a moment. Then, with reluctance: “I want to get the
grass cut,” he said.

We both looked down at the grass—there was a sharp line where my
ragged lawn ended and the darker, well-kept expanse of his began. I
suspected that he meant my grass.

“There’s another little thing,” he said uncertainly, and hesitated.

“Would you rather put it off for a few days?” I asked.

“Oh, it isn’t about that. At least—” He fumbled with a series of
beginnings. “Why, I thought—why, look here, old sport, you don’t make
much money, do you?”

“Not very much.”

This seemed to reassure him and he continued more confidently.

“I thought you didn’t, if you’ll pardon my—you see, I carry on a
little business on the side, a sort of side line, you understand. And
I thought that if you don’t make very much—You’re selling bonds,
aren’t you, old sport?”

“Trying to.”

“Well, this would interest you. It wouldn’t take up much of your time
and you might pick up a nice bit of money. It happens to be a rather
confidential sort of thing.”

I realize now that under different circumstances that conversation
might have been one of the crises of my life. But, because the offer
was obviously and tactlessly for a service to be rendered, I had no
choice except to cut him off there.

“I’ve got my hands full,” I said. “I’m much obliged but I couldn’t
take on any more work.”

“You wouldn’t have to do any business with Wolfshiem.” Evidently he
thought that I was shying away from the “gonnegtion” mentioned at
lunch, but I assured him he was wrong. He waited a moment longer,
hoping I’d begin a conversation, but I was too absorbed to be
responsive, so he went unwillingly home.

The evening had made me lightheaded and happy; I think I walked into a
deep sleep as I entered my front door. So I don’t know whether or not
Gatsby went to Coney Island, or for how many hours he “glanced into
rooms” while his house blazed gaudily on. I called up Daisy from the
office next morning, and invited her to come to tea.

“Don’t bring Tom,” I warned her.

“What?”

“Don’t bring Tom.”

“Who is ‘Tom’?” she asked innocently.

The day agreed upon was pouring rain. At eleven o’clock a man in a
raincoat, dragging a lawn-mower, tapped at my front door and said that
Mr. Gatsby had sent him over to cut my grass. This reminded me that I
had forgotten to tell my Finn to come back, so I drove into West Egg
Village to search for her among soggy whitewashed alleys and to buy
some cups and lemons and flowers.

The flowers were unnecessary, for at two o’clock a greenhouse arrived
from Gatsby’s, with innumerable receptacles to contain it. An hour
later the front door opened nervously, and Gatsby in a white flannel
suit, silver shirt, and gold-coloured tie, hurried in. He was pale,
and there were dark signs of sleeplessness beneath his eyes.

“Is everything all right?” he asked immediately.

“The grass looks fine, if that’s what you mean.”

“What grass?” he inquired blankly. “Oh, the grass in the yard.” He
looked out the window at it, but, judging from his expression, I don’t
believe he saw a thing.

“Looks very good,” he remarked vaguely. “One of the papers said they
thought the rain would stop about four. I think it was The
Journal. Have you got everything you need in the shape of—of tea?”

I took him into the pantry, where he looked a little reproachfully at
the Finn. Together we scrutinized the twelve lemon cakes from the
delicatessen shop.

“Will they do?” I asked.

“Of course, of course! They’re fine!” and he added hollowly, “… old
sport.”

The rain cooled about half-past three to a damp mist, through which
occasional thin drops swam like dew. Gatsby looked with vacant eyes
through a copy of Clay’s Economics, starting at the Finnish tread that
shook the kitchen floor, and peering towards the bleared windows from
time to time as if a series of invisible but alarming happenings were
taking place outside. Finally he got up and informed me, in an
uncertain voice, that he was going home.

“Why’s that?”

“Nobody’s coming to tea. It’s too late!” He looked at his watch as if
there was some pressing demand on his time elsewhere. “I can’t wait
all day.”

“Don’t be silly; it’s just two minutes to four.”

He sat down miserably, as if I had pushed him, and simultaneously
there was the sound of a motor turning into my lane. We both jumped
up, and, a little harrowed myself, I went out into the yard.

Under the dripping bare lilac-trees a large open car was coming up the
drive. It stopped. Daisy’s face, tipped sideways beneath a
three-cornered lavender hat, looked out at me with a bright ecstatic
smile.

“Is this absolutely where you live, my dearest one?”

The exhilarating ripple of her voice was a wild tonic in the rain. I
had to follow the sound of it for a moment, up and down, with my ear
alone, before any words came through. A damp streak of hair lay like a
dash of blue paint across her cheek, and her hand was wet with
glistening drops as I took it to help her from the car.

“Are you in love with me,” she said low in my ear, “or why did I have
to come alone?”

“That’s the secret of Castle Rackrent. Tell your chauffeur to go far
away and spend an hour.”

“Come back in an hour, Ferdie.” Then in a grave murmur: “His name is
Ferdie.”

“Does the gasoline affect his nose?”

“I don’t think so,” she said innocently. “Why?”

We went in. To my overwhelming surprise the living-room was deserted.

“Well, that’s funny,” I exclaimed.

“What’s funny?”

She turned her head as there was a light dignified knocking at the
front door. I went out and opened it. Gatsby, pale as death, with his
hands plunged like weights in his coat pockets, was standing in a
puddle of water glaring tragically into my eyes.

With his hands still in his coat pockets he stalked by me into the
hall, turned sharply as if he were on a wire, and disappeared into the
living-room. It wasn’t a bit funny. Aware of the loud beating of my
own heart I pulled the door to against the increasing rain.

For half a minute there wasn’t a sound. Then from the living-room I
heard a sort of choking murmur and part of a laugh, followed by
Daisy’s voice on a clear artificial note:

“I certainly am awfully glad to see you again.”

A pause; it endured horribly. I had nothing to do in the hall, so I
went into the room.

Gatsby, his hands still in his pockets, was reclining against the
mantelpiece in a strained counterfeit of perfect ease, even of
boredom. His head leaned back so far that it rested against the face
of a defunct mantelpiece clock, and from this position his distraught
eyes stared down at Daisy, who was sitting, frightened but graceful,
on the edge of a stiff chair.

“We’ve met before,” muttered Gatsby. His eyes glanced momentarily at
me, and his lips parted with an abortive attempt at a laugh. Luckily
the clock took this moment to tilt dangerously at the pressure of his
head, whereupon he turned and caught it with trembling fingers, and
set it back in place. Then he sat down, rigidly, his elbow on the arm
of the sofa and his chin in his hand.

“I’m sorry about the clock,” he said.

My own face had now assumed a deep tropical burn. I couldn’t muster up
a single commonplace out of the thousand in my head.

“It’s an old clock,” I told them idiotically.

I think we all believed for a moment that it had smashed in pieces on
the floor.

“We haven’t met for many years,” said Daisy, her voice as
matter-of-fact as it could ever be.

“Five years next November.”

The automatic quality of Gatsby’s answer set us all back at least
another minute. I had them both on their feet with the desperate
suggestion that they help me make tea in the kitchen when the demoniac
Finn brought it in on a tray.

Amid the welcome confusion of cups and cakes a certain physical
decency established itself. Gatsby got himself into a shadow and,
while Daisy and I talked, looked conscientiously from one to the other
of us with tense, unhappy eyes. However, as calmness wasn’t an end in
itself, I made an excuse at the first possible moment, and got to my
feet.

“Where are you going?” demanded Gatsby in immediate alarm.

“I’ll be back.”

“I’ve got to speak to you about something before you go.”

He followed me wildly into the kitchen, closed the door, and
whispered: “Oh, God!” in a miserable way.

“What’s the matter?”

“This is a terrible mistake,” he said, shaking his head from side to
side, “a terrible, terrible mistake.”

“You’re just embarrassed, that’s all,” and luckily I added: “Daisy’s
embarrassed too.”

“She’s embarrassed?” he repeated incredulously.

“Just as much as you are.”

“Don’t talk so loud.”

“You’re acting like a little boy,” I broke out impatiently. “Not only
that, but you’re rude. Daisy’s sitting in there all alone.”

He raised his hand to stop my words, looked at me with unforgettable
reproach, and, opening the door cautiously, went back into the other
room.

I walked out the back way—just as Gatsby had when he had made his
nervous circuit of the house half an hour before—and ran for a huge
black knotted tree, whose massed leaves made a fabric against the
rain. Once more it was pouring, and my irregular lawn, well-shaved by
Gatsby’s gardener, abounded in small muddy swamps and prehistoric
marshes. There was nothing to look at from under the tree except
Gatsby’s enormous house, so I stared at it, like Kant at his church
steeple, for half an hour. A brewer had built it early in the “period”
craze, a decade before, and there was a story that he’d agreed to pay
five years’ taxes on all the neighbouring cottages if the owners would
have their roofs thatched with straw. Perhaps their refusal took the
heart out of his plan to Found a Family—he went into an immediate
decline. His children sold his house with the black wreath still on
the door. Americans, while willing, even eager, to be serfs, have
always been obstinate about being peasantry.

After half an hour, the sun shone again, and the grocer’s automobile
rounded Gatsby’s drive with the raw material for his servants’
dinner—I felt sure he wouldn’t eat a spoonful. A maid began opening
the upper windows of his house, appeared momentarily in each, and,
leaning from the large central bay, spat meditatively into the
garden. It was time I went back. While the rain continued it had
seemed like the murmur of their voices, rising and swelling a little
now and then with gusts of emotion. But in the new silence I felt that
silence had fallen within the house too.

I went in—after making every possible noise in the kitchen, short of
pushing over the stove—but I don’t believe they heard a sound. They
were sitting at either end of the couch, looking at each other as if
some question had been asked, or was in the air, and every vestige of
embarrassment was gone. Daisy’s face was smeared with tears, and when
I came in she jumped up and began wiping at it with her handkerchief
before a mirror. But there was a change in Gatsby that was simply
confounding. He literally glowed; without a word or a gesture of
exultation a new well-being radiated from him and filled the little
room.

“Oh, hello, old sport,” he said, as if he hadn’t seen me for years. I
thought for a moment he was going to shake hands.

“It’s stopped raining.”

“Has it?” When he realized what I was talking about, that there were
twinkle-bells of sunshine in the room, he smiled like a weather man,
like an ecstatic patron of recurrent light, and repeated the news to
Daisy. “What do you think of that? It’s stopped raining.”

“I’m glad, Jay.” Her throat, full of aching, grieving beauty, told
only of her unexpected joy.

“I want you and Daisy to come over to my house,” he said, “I’d like to
show her around.”

“You’re sure you want me to come?”

“Absolutely, old sport.”

Daisy went upstairs to wash her face—too late I thought with
humiliation of my towels—while Gatsby and I waited on the lawn.

“My house looks well, doesn’t it?” he demanded. “See how the whole
front of it catches the light.”

I agreed that it was splendid.

“Yes.” His eyes went over it, every arched door and square tower. “It
took me just three years to earn the money that bought it.”

“I thought you inherited your money.”

“I did, old sport,” he said automatically, “but I lost most of it in
the big panic—the panic of the war.”

I think he hardly knew what he was saying, for when I asked him what
business he was in he answered: “That’s my affair,” before he realized
that it wasn’t an appropriate reply.

“Oh, I’ve been in several things,” he corrected himself. “I was in the
drug business and then I was in the oil business. But I’m not in
either one now.” He looked at me with more attention. “Do you mean
you’ve been thinking over what I proposed the other night?”

Before I could answer, Daisy came out of the house and two rows of
brass buttons on her dress gleamed in the sunlight.

“That huge place there?” she cried pointing.

“Do you like it?”

“I love it, but I don’t see how you live there all alone.”

“I keep it always full of interesting people, night and day. People
who do interesting things. Celebrated people.”

Instead of taking the shortcut along the Sound we went down to the
road and entered by the big postern. With enchanting murmurs Daisy
admired this aspect or that of the feudal silhouette against the sky,
admired the gardens, the sparkling odour of jonquils and the frothy
odour of hawthorn and plum blossoms and the pale gold odour of
kiss-me-at-the-gate. It was strange to reach the marble steps and find
no stir of bright dresses in and out the door, and hear no sound but
bird voices in the trees.

And inside, as we wandered through Marie Antoinette music-rooms and
Restoration Salons, I felt that there were guests concealed behind
every couch and table, under orders to be breathlessly silent until we
had passed through. As Gatsby closed the door of “the Merton College
Library” I could have sworn I heard the owl-eyed man break into
ghostly laughter.

We went upstairs, through period bedrooms swathed in rose and lavender
silk and vivid with new flowers, through dressing-rooms and poolrooms,
and bathrooms with sunken baths—intruding into one chamber where a
dishevelled man in pyjamas was doing liver exercises on the floor. It
was Mr. Klipspringer, the “boarder.” I had seen him wandering hungrily
about the beach that morning. Finally we came to Gatsby’s own
apartment, a bedroom and a bath, and an Adam’s study, where we sat
down and drank a glass of some Chartreuse he took from a cupboard in
the wall.

He hadn’t once ceased looking at Daisy, and I think he revalued
everything in his house according to the measure of response it drew
from her well-loved eyes. Sometimes too, he stared around at his
possessions in a dazed way, as though in her actual and astounding
presence none of it was any longer real. Once he nearly toppled down a
flight of stairs.

His bedroom was the simplest room of all—except where the dresser was
garnished with a toilet set of pure dull gold. Daisy took the brush
with delight, and smoothed her hair, whereupon Gatsby sat down and
shaded his eyes and began to laugh.

“It’s the funniest thing, old sport,” he said hilariously. “I
can’t—When I try to—”

He had passed visibly through two states and was entering upon a
third. After his embarrassment and his unreasoning joy he was consumed
with wonder at her presence. He had been full of the idea so long,
dreamed it right through to the end, waited with his teeth set, so to
speak, at an inconceivable pitch of intensity. Now, in the reaction,
he was running down like an over-wound clock.

Recovering himself in a minute he opened for us two hulking patent
cabinets which held his massed suits and dressing-gowns and ties, and
his shirts, piled like bricks in stacks a dozen high.

“I’ve got a man in England who buys me clothes. He sends over a
selection of things at the beginning of each season, spring and fall.”

He took out a pile of shirts and began throwing them, one by one,
before us, shirts of sheer linen and thick silk and fine flannel,
which lost their folds as they fell and covered the table in
many-coloured disarray. While we admired he brought more and the soft
rich heap mounted higher—shirts with stripes and scrolls and plaids in
coral and apple-green and lavender and faint orange, with monograms of
indian blue. Suddenly, with a strained sound, Daisy bent her head into
the shirts and began to cry stormily.

“They’re such beautiful shirts,” she sobbed, her voice muffled in the
thick folds. “It makes me sad because I’ve never seen such—such
beautiful shirts before.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

After the house, we were to see the grounds and the swimming pool, and
the hydroplane, and the midsummer flowers—but outside Gatsby’s window
it began to rain again, so we stood in a row looking at the corrugated
surface of the Sound.

“If it wasn’t for the mist we could see your home across the bay,”
said Gatsby. “You always have a green light that burns all night at
the end of your dock.”

Daisy put her arm through his abruptly, but he seemed absorbed in what
he had just said. Possibly it had occurred to him that the colossal
significance of that light had now vanished forever. Compared to the
great distance that had separated him from Daisy it had seemed very
near to her, almost touching her. It had seemed as close as a star to
the moon. Now it was again a green light on a dock. His count of
enchanted objects had diminished by one.

I began to walk about the room, examining various indefinite objects
in the half darkness. A large photograph of an elderly man in yachting
costume attracted me, hung on the wall over his desk.

“Who’s this?”

“That? That’s Mr. Dan Cody, old sport.”

The name sounded faintly familiar.

“He’s dead now. He used to be my best friend years ago.”

There was a small picture of Gatsby, also in yachting costume, on the
bureau—Gatsby with his head thrown back defiantly—taken apparently
when he was about eighteen.

“I adore it,” exclaimed Daisy. “The pompadour! You never told me you
had a pompadour—or a yacht.”

“Look at this,” said Gatsby quickly. “Here’s a lot of clippings—about
you.”

They stood side by side examining it. I was going to ask to see the
rubies when the phone rang, and Gatsby took up the receiver.

“Yes … Well, I can’t talk now … I can’t talk now, old sport … I said a
small town … He must know what a small town is … Well, he’s no use to
us if Detroit is his idea of a small town …”

He rang off.

“Come here quick!” cried Daisy at the window.

The rain was still falling, but the darkness had parted in the west,
and there was a pink and golden billow of foamy clouds above the sea.

“Look at that,” she whispered, and then after a moment: “I’d like to
just get one of those pink clouds and put you in it and push you
around.”

I tried to go then, but they wouldn’t hear of it; perhaps my presence
made them feel more satisfactorily alone.

“I know what we’ll do,” said Gatsby, “we’ll have Klipspringer play the
piano.”

He went out of the room calling “Ewing!” and returned in a few minutes
accompanied by an embarrassed, slightly worn young man, with
shell-rimmed glasses and scanty blond hair. He was now decently
clothed in a “sport shirt,” open at the neck, sneakers, and duck
trousers of a nebulous hue.

“Did we interrupt your exercise?” inquired Daisy politely.

“I was asleep,” cried Mr. Klipspringer, in a spasm of embarrassment.
“That is, I’d been asleep. Then I got up …”

“Klipspringer plays the piano,” said Gatsby, cutting him off. “Don’t
you, Ewing, old sport?”

“I don’t play well. I don’t—hardly play at all. I’m all out of prac—”

“We’ll go downstairs,” interrupted Gatsby. He flipped a switch. The
grey windows disappeared as the house glowed full of light.

In the music-room Gatsby turned on a solitary lamp beside the piano.
He lit Daisy’s cigarette from a trembling match, and sat down with her
on a couch far across the room, where there was no light save what the
gleaming floor bounced in from the hall.

When Klipspringer had played “The Love Nest” he turned around on the
bench and searched unhappily for Gatsby in the gloom.

“I’m all out of practice, you see. I told you I couldn’t play. I’m all
out of prac—”

“Don’t talk so much, old sport,” commanded Gatsby. “Play!”

 “In the morning, In the evening, Ain’t we got fun—”

Outside the wind was loud and there was a faint flow of thunder along
the Sound. All the lights were going on in West Egg now; the electric
trains, men-carrying, were plunging home through the rain from New
York. It was the hour of a profound human change, and excitement was
generating on the air.

 “One thing’s sure and nothing’s surer The rich get richer and the
 poor get—children. In the meantime, In between time—”

As I went over to say goodbye I saw that the expression of
bewilderment had come back into Gatsby’s face, as though a faint doubt
had occurred to him as to the quality of his present happiness. Almost
five years! There must have been moments even that afternoon when
Daisy tumbled short of his dreams—not through her own fault, but
because of the colossal vitality of his illusion. It had gone beyond
her, beyond everything. He had thrown himself into it with a creative
passion, adding to it all the time, decking it out with every bright
feather that drifted his way. No amount of fire or freshness can
challenge what a man can store up in his ghostly heart.

As I watched him he adjusted himself a little, visibly. His hand took
hold of hers, and as she said something low in his ear he turned
toward her with a rush of emotion. I think that voice held him most,
with its fluctuating, feverish warmth, because it couldn’t be
over-dreamed—that voice was a deathless song.

They had forgotten me, but Daisy glanced up and held out her hand;
Gatsby didn’t know me now at all. I looked once more at them and they
looked back at me, remotely, possessed by intense life. Then I went
out of the room and down the marble steps into the rain, leaving them
there together.


                                  VI

About this time an ambitious young reporter from New York arrived one
morning at Gatsby’s door and asked him if he had anything to say.

“Anything to say about what?” inquired Gatsby politely.

“Why—any statement to give out.”

It transpired after a confused five minutes that the man had heard
Gatsby’s name around his office in a connection which he either
wouldn’t reveal or didn’t fully understand. This was his day off and
with laudable initiative he had hurried out “to see.”

It was a random shot, and yet the reporter’s instinct was right.
Gatsby’s notoriety, spread about by the hundreds who had accepted his
hospitality and so become authorities upon his past, had increased all
summer until he fell just short of being news. Contemporary legends
such as the “underground pipeline to Canada” attached themselves to
him, and there was one persistent story that he didn’t live in a house
at all, but in a boat that looked like a house and was moved secretly
up and down the Long Island shore. Just why these inventions were a
source of satisfaction to James Gatz of North Dakota, isn’t easy to
say.

James Gatz—that was really, or at least legally, his name. He had
changed it at the age of seventeen and at the specific moment that
witnessed the beginning of his career—when he saw Dan Cody’s yacht
drop anchor over the most insidious flat on Lake Superior. It was
James Gatz who had been loafing along the beach that afternoon in a
torn green jersey and a pair of canvas pants, but it was already Jay
Gatsby who borrowed a rowboat, pulled out to the Tuolomee, and
informed Cody that a wind might catch him and break him up in half an
hour.

I suppose he’d had the name ready for a long time, even then. His
parents were shiftless and unsuccessful farm people—his imagination
had never really accepted them as his parents at all. The truth was
that Jay Gatsby of West Egg, Long Island, sprang from his Platonic
conception of himself. He was a son of God—a phrase which, if it means
anything, means just that—and he must be about His Father’s business,
the service of a vast, vulgar, and meretricious beauty. So he invented
just the sort of Jay Gatsby that a seventeen-year-old boy would be
likely to invent, and to this conception he was faithful to the end.

For over a year he had been beating his way along the south shore of
Lake Superior as a clam-digger and a salmon-fisher or in any other
capacity that brought him food and bed. His brown, hardening body
lived naturally through the half-fierce, half-lazy work of the bracing
days. He knew women early, and since they spoiled him he became
contemptuous of them, of young virgins because they were ignorant, of
the others because they were hysterical about things which in his
overwhelming self-absorption he took for granted.

But his heart was in a constant, turbulent riot. The most grotesque
and fantastic conceits haunted him in his bed at night. A universe of
ineffable gaudiness spun itself out in his brain while the clock
ticked on the washstand and the moon soaked with wet light his tangled
clothes upon the floor. Each night he added to the pattern of his
fancies until drowsiness closed down upon some vivid scene with an
oblivious embrace. For a while these reveries provided an outlet for
his imagination; they were a satisfactory hint of the unreality of
reality, a promise that the rock of the world was founded securely on
a fairy’s wing.

An instinct toward his future glory had led him, some months before,
to the small Lutheran College of St. Olaf’s in southern Minnesota. He
stayed there two weeks, dismayed at its ferocious indifference to the
drums of his destiny, to destiny itself, and despising the janitor’s
work with which he was to pay his way through. Then he drifted back to
Lake Superior, and he was still searching for something to do on the
day that Dan Cody’s yacht dropped anchor in the shallows alongshore.

Cody was fifty years old then, a product of the Nevada silver fields,
of the Yukon, of every rush for metal since seventy-five. The
transactions in Montana copper that made him many times a millionaire
found him physically robust but on the verge of soft-mindedness, and,
suspecting this, an infinite number of women tried to separate him
from his money. The none too savoury ramifications by which Ella Kaye,
the newspaper woman, played Madame de Maintenon to his weakness and
sent him to sea in a yacht, were common property of the turgid
journalism in 1902. He had been coasting along all too hospitable
shores for five years when he turned up as James Gatz’s destiny in
Little Girl Bay.

To young Gatz, resting on his oars and looking up at the railed deck,
that yacht represented all the beauty and glamour in the world. I
suppose he smiled at Cody—he had probably discovered that people liked
him when he smiled. At any rate Cody asked him a few questions (one of
them elicited the brand new name) and found that he was quick and
extravagantly ambitious. A few days later he took him to Duluth and
bought him a blue coat, six pairs of white duck trousers, and a
yachting cap. And when the Tuolomee left for the West Indies and the
Barbary Coast, Gatsby left too.

He was employed in a vague personal capacity—while he remained with
Cody he was in turn steward, mate, skipper, secretary, and even
jailor, for Dan Cody sober knew what lavish doings Dan Cody drunk
might soon be about, and he provided for such contingencies by
reposing more and more trust in Gatsby. The arrangement lasted five
years, during which the boat went three times around the Continent.
It might have lasted indefinitely except for the fact that Ella Kaye
came on board one night in Boston and a week later Dan Cody
inhospitably died.

I remember the portrait of him up in Gatsby’s bedroom, a grey, florid
man with a hard, empty face—the pioneer debauchee, who during one
phase of American life brought back to the Eastern seaboard the savage
violence of the frontier brothel and saloon. It was indirectly due to
Cody that Gatsby drank so little. Sometimes in the course of gay
parties women used to rub champagne into his hair; for himself he
formed the habit of letting liquor alone.

And it was from Cody that he inherited money—a legacy of twenty-five
thousand dollars. He didn’t get it. He never understood the legal
device that was used against him, but what remained of the millions
went intact to Ella Kaye. He was left with his singularly appropriate
education; the vague contour of Jay Gatsby had filled out to the
substantiality of a man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

He told me all this very much later, but I’ve put it down here with
the idea of exploding those first wild rumours about his antecedents,
which weren’t even faintly true. Moreover he told it to me at a time
of confusion, when I had reached the point of believing everything and
nothing about him. So I take advantage of this short halt, while
Gatsby, so to speak, caught his breath, to clear this set of
misconceptions away.

It was a halt, too, in my association with his affairs. For several
weeks I didn’t see him or hear his voice on the phone—mostly I was in
New York, trotting around with Jordan and trying to ingratiate myself
with her senile aunt—but finally I went over to his house one Sunday
afternoon. I hadn’t been there two minutes when somebody brought Tom
Buchanan in for a drink. I was startled, naturally, but the really
surprising thing was that it hadn’t happened before.

They were a party of three on horseback—Tom and a man named Sloane and
a pretty woman in a brown riding-habit, who had been there previously.

“I’m delighted to see you,” said Gatsby, standing on his porch. “I’m
delighted that you dropped in.”

As though they cared!

“Sit right down. Have a cigarette or a cigar.” He walked around the
room quickly, ringing bells. “I’ll have something to drink for you in
just a minute.”

He was profoundly affected by the fact that Tom was there. But he
would be uneasy anyhow until he had given them something, realizing in
a vague way that that was all they came for. Mr. Sloane wanted
nothing. A lemonade? No, thanks. A little champagne? Nothing at all,
thanks … I’m sorry—

“Did you have a nice ride?”

“Very good roads around here.”

“I suppose the automobiles—”

“Yeah.”

Moved by an irresistible impulse, Gatsby turned to Tom, who had
accepted the introduction as a stranger.

“I believe we’ve met somewhere before, Mr. Buchanan.”

“Oh, yes,” said Tom, gruffly polite, but obviously not remembering.
“So we did. I remember very well.”

“About two weeks ago.”

“That’s right. You were with Nick here.”

“I know your wife,” continued Gatsby, almost aggressively.

“That so?”

Tom turned to me.

“You live near here, Nick?”

“Next door.”

“That so?”

Mr. Sloane didn’t enter into the conversation, but lounged back
haughtily in his chair; the woman said nothing either—until
unexpectedly, after two highballs, she became cordial.

“We’ll all come over to your next party, Mr. Gatsby,” she suggested.
“What do you say?”

“Certainly; I’d be delighted to have you.”

“Be ver’ nice,” said Mr. Sloane, without gratitude. “Well—think ought
to be starting home.”

“Please don’t hurry,” Gatsby urged them. He had control of himself
now, and he wanted to see more of Tom. “Why don’t you—why don’t you
stay for supper? I wouldn’t be surprised if some other people dropped
in from New York.”

“You come to supper with me,” said the lady enthusiastically. “Both of
you.”

This included me. Mr. Sloane got to his feet.

“Come along,” he said—but to her only.

“I mean it,” she insisted. “I’d love to have you. Lots of room.”

Gatsby looked at me questioningly. He wanted to go and he didn’t see
that Mr. Sloane had determined he shouldn’t.

“I’m afraid I won’t be able to,” I said.

“Well, you come,” she urged, concentrating on Gatsby.

Mr. Sloane murmured something close to her ear.

“We won’t be late if we start now,” she insisted aloud.

“I haven’t got a horse,” said Gatsby. “I used to ride in the army, but
I’ve never bought a horse. I’ll have to follow you in my car. Excuse
me for just a minute.”

The rest of us walked out on the porch, where Sloane and the lady
began an impassioned conversation aside.

“My God, I believe the man’s coming,” said Tom. “Doesn’t he know she
doesn’t want him?”

“She says she does want him.”

“She has a big dinner party and he won’t know a soul there.” He
frowned. “I wonder where in the devil he met Daisy. By God, I may be
old-fashioned in my ideas, but women run around too much these days to
suit me. They meet all kinds of crazy fish.”

Suddenly Mr. Sloane and the lady walked down the steps and mounted
their horses.

“Come on,” said Mr. Sloane to Tom, “we’re late. We’ve got to go.”  And
then to me: “Tell him we couldn’t wait, will you?”

Tom and I shook hands, the rest of us exchanged a cool nod, and they
trotted quickly down the drive, disappearing under the August foliage
just as Gatsby, with hat and light overcoat in hand, came out the
front door.

Tom was evidently perturbed at Daisy’s running around alone, for on
the following Saturday night he came with her to Gatsby’s
party. Perhaps his presence gave the evening its peculiar quality of
oppressiveness—it stands out in my memory from Gatsby’s other parties
that summer. There were the same people, or at least the same sort of
people, the same profusion of champagne, the same many-coloured,
many-keyed commotion, but I felt an unpleasantness in the air, a
pervading harshness that hadn’t been there before. Or perhaps I had
merely grown used to it, grown to accept West Egg as a world complete
in itself, with its own standards and its own great figures, second to
nothing because it had no consciousness of being so, and now I was
looking at it again, through Daisy’s eyes. It is invariably saddening
to look through new eyes at things upon which you have expended your
own powers of adjustment.

They arrived at twilight, and, as we strolled out among the sparkling
hundreds, Daisy’s voice was playing murmurous tricks in her throat.

“These things excite me so,” she whispered. “If you want to kiss me
any time during the evening, Nick, just let me know and I’ll be glad
to arrange it for you. Just mention my name. Or present a green card.
I’m giving out green—”

“Look around,” suggested Gatsby.

“I’m looking around. I’m having a marvellous—”

“You must see the faces of many people you’ve heard about.”

Tom’s arrogant eyes roamed the crowd.

“We don’t go around very much,” he said; “in fact, I was just thinking
I don’t know a soul here.”

“Perhaps you know that lady.” Gatsby indicated a gorgeous, scarcely
human orchid of a woman who sat in state under a white-plum tree. Tom
and Daisy stared, with that peculiarly unreal feeling that accompanies
the recognition of a hitherto ghostly celebrity of the movies.

“She’s lovely,” said Daisy.

“The man bending over her is her director.”

He took them ceremoniously from group to group:

“Mrs. Buchanan … and Mr. Buchanan—” After an instant’s hesitation he
added: “the polo player.”

“Oh no,” objected Tom quickly, “not me.”

But evidently the sound of it pleased Gatsby for Tom remained “the
polo player” for the rest of the evening.

“I’ve never met so many celebrities,” Daisy exclaimed. “I liked that
man—what was his name?—with the sort of blue nose.”

Gatsby identified him, adding that he was a small producer.

“Well, I liked him anyhow.”

“I’d a little rather not be the polo player,” said Tom pleasantly,
“I’d rather look at all these famous people in—in oblivion.”

Daisy and Gatsby danced. I remember being surprised by his graceful,
conservative foxtrot—I had never seen him dance before. Then they
sauntered over to my house and sat on the steps for half an hour,
while at her request I remained watchfully in the garden. “In case
there’s a fire or a flood,” she explained, “or any act of God.”

Tom appeared from his oblivion as we were sitting down to supper
together. “Do you mind if I eat with some people over here?” he
said. “A fellow’s getting off some funny stuff.”

“Go ahead,” answered Daisy genially, “and if you want to take down any
addresses here’s my little gold pencil.” … She looked around after a
moment and told me the girl was “common but pretty,” and I knew that
except for the half-hour she’d been alone with Gatsby she wasn’t
having a good time.

We were at a particularly tipsy table. That was my fault—Gatsby had
been called to the phone, and I’d enjoyed these same people only two
weeks before. But what had amused me then turned septic on the air
now.

“How do you feel, Miss Baedeker?”

The girl addressed was trying, unsuccessfully, to slump against my
shoulder. At this inquiry she sat up and opened her eyes.

“Wha’?”

A massive and lethargic woman, who had been urging Daisy to play golf
with her at the local club tomorrow, spoke in Miss Baedeker’s defence:

“Oh, she’s all right now. When she’s had five or six cocktails she
always starts screaming like that. I tell her she ought to leave it
alone.”

“I do leave it alone,” affirmed the accused hollowly.

“We heard you yelling, so I said to Doc Civet here: ‘There’s somebody
that needs your help, Doc.’ ”

“She’s much obliged, I’m sure,” said another friend, without
gratitude, “but you got her dress all wet when you stuck her head in
the pool.”

“Anything I hate is to get my head stuck in a pool,” mumbled Miss
Baedeker. “They almost drowned me once over in New Jersey.”

“Then you ought to leave it alone,” countered Doctor Civet.

“Speak for yourself!” cried Miss Baedeker violently. “Your hand
shakes. I wouldn’t let you operate on me!”

It was like that. Almost the last thing I remember was standing with
Daisy and watching the moving-picture director and his Star. They were
still under the white-plum tree and their faces were touching except
for a pale, thin ray of moonlight between. It occurred to me that he
had been very slowly bending toward her all evening to attain this
proximity, and even while I watched I saw him stoop one ultimate
degree and kiss at her cheek.

“I like her,” said Daisy, “I think she’s lovely.”

But the rest offended her—and inarguably because it wasn’t a gesture
but an emotion. She was appalled by West Egg, this unprecedented
“place” that Broadway had begotten upon a Long Island fishing
village—appalled by its raw vigour that chafed under the old
euphemisms and by the too obtrusive fate that herded its inhabitants
along a shortcut from nothing to nothing. She saw something awful in
the very simplicity she failed to understand.

I sat on the front steps with them while they waited for their car.
It was dark here in front; only the bright door sent ten square feet
of light volleying out into the soft black morning. Sometimes a shadow
moved against a dressing-room blind above, gave way to another shadow,
an indefinite procession of shadows, who rouged and powdered in an
invisible glass.

“Who is this Gatsby anyhow?” demanded Tom suddenly. “Some big
bootlegger?”

“Where’d you hear that?” I inquired.

“I didn’t hear it. I imagined it. A lot of these newly rich people are
just big bootleggers, you know.”

“Not Gatsby,” I said shortly.

He was silent for a moment. The pebbles of the drive crunched under
his feet.

“Well, he certainly must have strained himself to get this menagerie
together.”

A breeze stirred the grey haze of Daisy’s fur collar.

“At least they are more interesting than the people we know,” she said
with an effort.

“You didn’t look so interested.”

“Well, I was.”

Tom laughed and turned to me.

“Did you notice Daisy’s face when that girl asked her to put her under
a cold shower?”

Daisy began to sing with the music in a husky, rhythmic whisper,
bringing out a meaning in each word that it had never had before and
would never have again. When the melody rose her voice broke up
sweetly, following it, in a way contralto voices have, and each change
tipped out a little of her warm human magic upon the air.

“Lots of people come who haven’t been invited,” she said
suddenly. “That girl hadn’t been invited. They simply force their way
in and he’s too polite to object.”

“I’d like to know who he is and what he does,” insisted Tom. “And I
think I’ll make a point of finding out.”

“I can tell you right now,” she answered. “He owned some drugstores, a
lot of drugstores. He built them up himself.”

The dilatory limousine came rolling up the drive.

“Good night, Nick,” said Daisy.

Her glance left me and sought the lighted top of the steps, where
“Three O’Clock in the Morning,” a neat, sad little waltz of that year,
was drifting out the open door. After all, in the very casualness of
Gatsby’s party there were romantic possibilities totally absent from
her world. What was it up there in the song that seemed to be calling
her back inside? What would happen now in the dim, incalculable hours?
Perhaps some unbelievable guest would arrive, a person infinitely rare
and to be marvelled at, some authentically radiant young girl who with
one fresh glance at Gatsby, one moment of magical encounter, would
blot out those five years of unwavering devotion.

I stayed late that night. Gatsby asked me to wait until he was free,
and I lingered in the garden until the inevitable swimming party had
run up, chilled and exalted, from the black beach, until the lights
were extinguished in the guestrooms overhead. When he came down the
steps at last the tanned skin was drawn unusually tight on his face,
and his eyes were bright and tired.

“She didn’t like it,” he said immediately.

“Of course she did.”

“She didn’t like it,” he insisted. “She didn’t have a good time.”

He was silent, and I guessed at his unutterable depression.

“I feel far away from her,” he said. “It’s hard to make her
understand.”

“You mean about the dance?”

“The dance?” He dismissed all the dances he had given with a snap of
his fingers. “Old sport, the dance is unimportant.”

He wanted nothing less of Daisy than that she should go to Tom and
say: “I never loved you.” After she had obliterated four years with
that sentence they could decide upon the more practical measures to be
taken. One of them was that, after she was free, they were to go back
to Louisville and be married from her house—just as if it were five
years ago.

“And she doesn’t understand,” he said. “She used to be able to
understand. We’d sit for hours—”

He broke off and began to walk up and down a desolate path of fruit
rinds and discarded favours and crushed flowers.

“I wouldn’t ask too much of her,” I ventured. “You can’t repeat the
past.”

“Can’t repeat the past?” he cried incredulously. “Why of course you
can!”

He looked around him wildly, as if the past were lurking here in the
shadow of his house, just out of reach of his hand.

“I’m going to fix everything just the way it was before,” he said,
nodding determinedly. “She’ll see.”

He talked a lot about the past, and I gathered that he wanted to
recover something, some idea of himself perhaps, that had gone into
loving Daisy. His life had been confused and disordered since then,
but if he could once return to a certain starting place and go over it
all slowly, he could find out what that thing was …

… One autumn night, five years before, they had been walking down the
street when the leaves were falling, and they came to a place where
there were no trees and the sidewalk was white with moonlight. They
stopped here and turned toward each other. Now it was a cool night
with that mysterious excitement in it which comes at the two changes
of the year. The quiet lights in the houses were humming out into the
darkness and there was a stir and bustle among the stars. Out of the
corner of his eye Gatsby saw that the blocks of the sidewalks really
formed a ladder and mounted to a secret place above the trees—he could
climb to it, if he climbed alone, and once there he could suck on the
pap of life, gulp down the incomparable milk of wonder.

His heart beat faster as Daisy’s white face came up to his own. He
knew that when he kissed this girl, and forever wed his unutterable
visions to her perishable breath, his mind would never romp again like
the mind of God. So he waited, listening for a moment longer to the
tuning-fork that had been struck upon a star. Then he kissed her. At
his lips’ touch she blossomed for him like a flower and the
incarnation was complete.

Through all he said, even through his appalling sentimentality, I was
reminded of something—an elusive rhythm, a fragment of lost words,
that I had heard somewhere a long time ago. For a moment a phrase
tried to take shape in my mouth and my lips parted like a dumb man’s,
as though there was more struggling upon them than a wisp of startled
air. But they made no sound, and what I had almost remembered was
uncommunicable forever.


                                 VII

It was when curiosity about Gatsby was at its highest that the lights
in his house failed to go on one Saturday night—and, as obscurely as
it had begun, his career as Trimalchio was over. Only gradually did I
become aware that the automobiles which turned expectantly into his
drive stayed for just a minute and then drove sulkily away. Wondering
if he were sick I went over to find out—an unfamiliar butler with a
villainous face squinted at me suspiciously from the door.

“Is Mr. Gatsby sick?”

“Nope.” After a pause he added “sir” in a dilatory, grudging way.

“I hadn’t seen him around, and I was rather worried. Tell him Mr.
Carraway came over.”

“Who?” he demanded rudely.

“Carraway.”

“Carraway. All right, I’ll tell him.”

Abruptly he slammed the door.

My Finn informed me that Gatsby had dismissed every servant in his
house a week ago and replaced them with half a dozen others, who never
went into West Egg village to be bribed by the tradesmen, but ordered
moderate supplies over the telephone. The grocery boy reported that
the kitchen looked like a pigsty, and the general opinion in the
village was that the new people weren’t servants at all.

Next day Gatsby called me on the phone.

“Going away?” I inquired.

“No, old sport.”

“I hear you fired all your servants.”

“I wanted somebody who wouldn’t gossip. Daisy comes over quite
often—in the afternoons.”

So the whole caravansary had fallen in like a card house at the
disapproval in her eyes.

“They’re some people Wolfshiem wanted to do something for. They’re all
brothers and sisters. They used to run a small hotel.”

“I see.”

He was calling up at Daisy’s request—would I come to lunch at her
house tomorrow? Miss Baker would be there. Half an hour later Daisy
herself telephoned and seemed relieved to find that I was
coming. Something was up. And yet I couldn’t believe that they would
choose this occasion for a scene—especially for the rather harrowing
scene that Gatsby had outlined in the garden.

The next day was broiling, almost the last, certainly the warmest, of
the summer. As my train emerged from the tunnel into sunlight, only
the hot whistles of the National Biscuit Company broke the simmering
hush at noon. The straw seats of the car hovered on the edge of
combustion; the woman next to me perspired delicately for a while into
her white shirtwaist, and then, as her newspaper dampened under her
fingers, lapsed despairingly into deep heat with a desolate cry. Her
pocketbook slapped to the floor.

“Oh, my!” she gasped.

I picked it up with a weary bend and handed it back to her, holding it
at arm’s length and by the extreme tip of the corners to indicate that
I had no designs upon it—but everyone near by, including the woman,
suspected me just the same.

“Hot!” said the conductor to familiar faces. “Some weather! … Hot! …
Hot! … Hot! … Is it hot enough for you? Is it hot? Is it … ?”

My commutation ticket came back to me with a dark stain from his hand.
That anyone should care in this heat whose flushed lips he kissed,
whose head made damp the pyjama pocket over his heart!

… Through the hall of the Buchanans’ house blew a faint wind, carrying
the sound of the telephone bell out to Gatsby and me as we waited at
the door.

“The master’s body?” roared the butler into the mouthpiece. “I’m
sorry, madame, but we can’t furnish it—it’s far too hot to touch this
noon!”

What he really said was: “Yes … Yes … I’ll see.”

He set down the receiver and came toward us, glistening slightly, to
take our stiff straw hats.

“Madame expects you in the salon!” he cried, needlessly indicating the
direction. In this heat every extra gesture was an affront to the
common store of life.

The room, shadowed well with awnings, was dark and cool. Daisy and
Jordan lay upon an enormous couch, like silver idols weighing down
their own white dresses against the singing breeze of the fans.

“We can’t move,” they said together.

Jordan’s fingers, powdered white over their tan, rested for a moment
in mine.

“And Mr. Thomas Buchanan, the athlete?” I inquired.

Simultaneously I heard his voice, gruff, muffled, husky, at the hall
telephone.

Gatsby stood in the centre of the crimson carpet and gazed around with
fascinated eyes. Daisy watched him and laughed, her sweet, exciting
laugh; a tiny gust of powder rose from her bosom into the air.

“The rumour is,” whispered Jordan, “that that’s Tom’s girl on the
telephone.”

We were silent. The voice in the hall rose high with annoyance: “Very
well, then, I won’t sell you the car at all … I’m under no obligations
to you at all … and as for your bothering me about it at lunch time, I
won’t stand that at all!”

“Holding down the receiver,” said Daisy cynically.

“No, he’s not,” I assured her. “It’s a bona-fide deal. I happen to
know about it.”

Tom flung open the door, blocked out its space for a moment with his
thick body, and hurried into the room.

“Mr. Gatsby!” He put out his broad, flat hand with well-concealed
dislike. “I’m glad to see you, sir … Nick …”

“Make us a cold drink,” cried Daisy.

As he left the room again she got up and went over to Gatsby and
pulled his face down, kissing him on the mouth.

“You know I love you,” she murmured.

“You forget there’s a lady present,” said Jordan.

Daisy looked around doubtfully.

“You kiss Nick too.”

“What a low, vulgar girl!”

“I don’t care!” cried Daisy, and began to clog on the brick fireplace.
Then she remembered the heat and sat down guiltily on the couch just
as a freshly laundered nurse leading a little girl came into the room.

“Bles-sed pre-cious,” she crooned, holding out her arms. “Come to your
own mother that loves you.”

The child, relinquished by the nurse, rushed across the room and
rooted shyly into her mother’s dress.

“The bles-sed pre-cious! Did mother get powder on your old yellowy
hair? Stand up now, and say—How-de-do.”

Gatsby and I in turn leaned down and took the small reluctant hand.
Afterward he kept looking at the child with surprise. I don’t think he
had ever really believed in its existence before.

“I got dressed before luncheon,” said the child, turning eagerly to
Daisy.

“That’s because your mother wanted to show you off.” Her face bent
into the single wrinkle of the small white neck. “You dream, you. You
absolute little dream.”

“Yes,” admitted the child calmly. “Aunt Jordan’s got on a white dress
too.”

“How do you like mother’s friends?” Daisy turned her around so that
she faced Gatsby. “Do you think they’re pretty?”

“Where’s Daddy?”

“She doesn’t look like her father,” explained Daisy. “She looks like
me. She’s got my hair and shape of the face.”

Daisy sat back upon the couch. The nurse took a step forward and held
out her hand.

“Come, Pammy.”

“Goodbye, sweetheart!”

With a reluctant backward glance the well-disciplined child held to
her nurse’s hand and was pulled out the door, just as Tom came back,
preceding four gin rickeys that clicked full of ice.

Gatsby took up his drink.

“They certainly look cool,” he said, with visible tension.

We drank in long, greedy swallows.

“I read somewhere that the sun’s getting hotter every year,” said Tom
genially. “It seems that pretty soon the earth’s going to fall into
the sun—or wait a minute—it’s just the opposite—the sun’s getting
colder every year.

“Come outside,” he suggested to Gatsby, “I’d like you to have a look
at the place.”

I went with them out to the veranda. On the green Sound, stagnant in
the heat, one small sail crawled slowly toward the fresher sea.
Gatsby’s eyes followed it momentarily; he raised his hand and pointed
across the bay.

“I’m right across from you.”

“So you are.”

Our eyes lifted over the rose-beds and the hot lawn and the weedy
refuse of the dog-days alongshore. Slowly the white wings of the boat
moved against the blue cool limit of the sky. Ahead lay the scalloped
ocean and the abounding blessed isles.

“There’s sport for you,” said Tom, nodding. “I’d like to be out there
with him for about an hour.”

We had luncheon in the dining-room, darkened too against the heat, and
drank down nervous gaiety with the cold ale.

“What’ll we do with ourselves this afternoon?” cried Daisy, “and the
day after that, and the next thirty years?”

“Don’t be morbid,” Jordan said. “Life starts all over again when it
gets crisp in the fall.”

“But it’s so hot,” insisted Daisy, on the verge of tears, “and
everything’s so confused. Let’s all go to town!”

Her voice struggled on through the heat, beating against it, moulding
its senselessness into forms.

“I’ve heard of making a garage out of a stable,” Tom was saying to
Gatsby, “but I’m the first man who ever made a stable out of a
garage.”

“Who wants to go to town?” demanded Daisy insistently. Gatsby’s eyes
floated toward her. “Ah,” she cried, “you look so cool.”

Their eyes met, and they stared together at each other, alone in
space. With an effort she glanced down at the table.

“You always look so cool,” she repeated.

She had told him that she loved him, and Tom Buchanan saw. He was
astounded. His mouth opened a little, and he looked at Gatsby, and
then back at Daisy as if he had just recognized her as someone he knew
a long time ago.

“You resemble the advertisement of the man,” she went on innocently.
“You know the advertisement of the man—”

“All right,” broke in Tom quickly, “I’m perfectly willing to go to
town. Come on—we’re all going to town.”

He got up, his eyes still flashing between Gatsby and his wife. No one
moved.

“Come on!” His temper cracked a little. “What’s the matter, anyhow?
If we’re going to town, let’s start.”

His hand, trembling with his effort at self-control, bore to his lips
the last of his glass of ale. Daisy’s voice got us to our feet and out
on to the blazing gravel drive.

“Are we just going to go?” she objected. “Like this? Aren’t we going
to let anyone smoke a cigarette first?”

“Everybody smoked all through lunch.”

“Oh, let’s have fun,” she begged him. “It’s too hot to fuss.”

He didn’t answer.

“Have it your own way,” she said. “Come on, Jordan.”

They went upstairs to get ready while we three men stood there
shuffling the hot pebbles with our feet. A silver curve of the moon
hovered already in the western sky. Gatsby started to speak, changed
his mind, but not before Tom wheeled and faced him expectantly.

“Have you got your stables here?” asked Gatsby with an effort.

“About a quarter of a mile down the road.”

“Oh.”

A pause.

“I don’t see the idea of going to town,” broke out Tom savagely.
“Women get these notions in their heads—”

“Shall we take anything to drink?” called Daisy from an upper window.

“I’ll get some whisky,” answered Tom. He went inside.

Gatsby turned to me rigidly:

“I can’t say anything in his house, old sport.”

“She’s got an indiscreet voice,” I remarked. “It’s full of—” I
hesitated.

“Her voice is full of money,” he said suddenly.

That was it. I’d never understood before. It was full of money—that
was the inexhaustible charm that rose and fell in it, the jingle of
it, the cymbals’ song of it … High in a white palace the king’s
daughter, the golden girl …

Tom came out of the house wrapping a quart bottle in a towel, followed
by Daisy and Jordan wearing small tight hats of metallic cloth and
carrying light capes over their arms.

“Shall we all go in my car?” suggested Gatsby. He felt the hot, green
leather of the seat. “I ought to have left it in the shade.”

“Is it standard shift?” demanded Tom.

“Yes.”

“Well, you take my coupé and let me drive your car to town.”

The suggestion was distasteful to Gatsby.

“I don’t think there’s much gas,” he objected.

“Plenty of gas,” said Tom boisterously. He looked at the gauge. “And
if it runs out I can stop at a drugstore. You can buy anything at a
drugstore nowadays.”

A pause followed this apparently pointless remark. Daisy looked at Tom
frowning, and an indefinable expression, at once definitely unfamiliar
and vaguely recognizable, as if I had only heard it described in
words, passed over Gatsby’s face.

“Come on, Daisy” said Tom, pressing her with his hand toward Gatsby’s
car. “I’ll take you in this circus wagon.”

He opened the door, but she moved out from the circle of his arm.

“You take Nick and Jordan. We’ll follow you in the coupé.”

She walked close to Gatsby, touching his coat with her hand. Jordan
and Tom and I got into the front seat of Gatsby’s car, Tom pushed the
unfamiliar gears tentatively, and we shot off into the oppressive
heat, leaving them out of sight behind.

“Did you see that?” demanded Tom.

“See what?”

He looked at me keenly, realizing that Jordan and I must have known
all along.

“You think I’m pretty dumb, don’t you?” he suggested. “Perhaps I am,
but I have a—almost a second sight, sometimes, that tells me what to
do. Maybe you don’t believe that, but science—”

He paused. The immediate contingency overtook him, pulled him back
from the edge of theoretical abyss.

“I’ve made a small investigation of this fellow,” he continued. “I
could have gone deeper if I’d known—”

“Do you mean you’ve been to a medium?” inquired Jordan humorously.

“What?” Confused, he stared at us as we laughed. “A medium?”

“About Gatsby.”

“About Gatsby! No, I haven’t. I said I’d been making a small
investigation of his past.”

“And you found he was an Oxford man,” said Jordan helpfully.

“An Oxford man!” He was incredulous. “Like hell he is! He wears a pink
suit.”

“Nevertheless he’s an Oxford man.”

“Oxford, New Mexico,” snorted Tom contemptuously, “or something like
that.”

“Listen, Tom. If you’re such a snob, why did you invite him to lunch?”
demanded Jordan crossly.

“Daisy invited him; she knew him before we were married—God knows
where!”

We were all irritable now with the fading ale, and aware of it we
drove for a while in silence. Then as Doctor T. J. Eckleburg’s faded
eyes came into sight down the road, I remembered Gatsby’s caution
about gasoline.

“We’ve got enough to get us to town,” said Tom.

“But there’s a garage right here,” objected Jordan. “I don’t want to
get stalled in this baking heat.”

Tom threw on both brakes impatiently, and we slid to an abrupt dusty
stop under Wilson’s sign. After a moment the proprietor emerged from
the interior of his establishment and gazed hollow-eyed at the car.

“Let’s have some gas!” cried Tom roughly. “What do you think we
stopped for—to admire the view?”

“I’m sick,” said Wilson without moving. “Been sick all day.”

“What’s the matter?”

“I’m all run down.”

“Well, shall I help myself?” Tom demanded. “You sounded well enough on
the phone.”

With an effort Wilson left the shade and support of the doorway and,
breathing hard, unscrewed the cap of the tank. In the sunlight his
face was green.

“I didn’t mean to interrupt your lunch,” he said. “But I need money
pretty bad, and I was wondering what you were going to do with your
old car.”

“How do you like this one?” inquired Tom. “I bought it last week.”

“It’s a nice yellow one,” said Wilson, as he strained at the handle.

“Like to buy it?”

“Big chance,” Wilson smiled faintly. “No, but I could make some money
on the other.”

“What do you want money for, all of a sudden?”

“I’ve been here too long. I want to get away. My wife and I want to go
West.”

“Your wife does,” exclaimed Tom, startled.

“She’s been talking about it for ten years.” He rested for a moment
against the pump, shading his eyes. “And now she’s going whether she
wants to or not. I’m going to get her away.”

The coupé flashed by us with a flurry of dust and the flash of a
waving hand.

“What do I owe you?” demanded Tom harshly.

“I just got wised up to something funny the last two days,” remarked
Wilson. “That’s why I want to get away. That’s why I been bothering
you about the car.”

“What do I owe you?”

“Dollar twenty.”

The relentless beating heat was beginning to confuse me and I had a
bad moment there before I realized that so far his suspicions hadn’t
alighted on Tom. He had discovered that Myrtle had some sort of life
apart from him in another world, and the shock had made him physically
sick. I stared at him and then at Tom, who had made a parallel
discovery less than an hour before—and it occurred to me that there
was no difference between men, in intelligence or race, so profound as
the difference between the sick and the well. Wilson was so sick that
he looked guilty, unforgivably guilty—as if he had just got some poor
girl with child.

“I’ll let you have that car,” said Tom. “I’ll send it over tomorrow
afternoon.”

That locality was always vaguely disquieting, even in the broad glare
of afternoon, and now I turned my head as though I had been warned of
something behind. Over the ash-heaps the giant eyes of Doctor T. J.
Eckleburg kept their vigil, but I perceived, after a moment, that
other eyes were regarding us with peculiar intensity from less than
twenty feet away.

In one of the windows over the garage the curtains had been moved
aside a little, and Myrtle Wilson was peering down at the car. So
engrossed was she that she had no consciousness of being observed, and
one emotion after another crept into her face like objects into a
slowly developing picture. Her expression was curiously familiar—it
was an expression I had often seen on women’s faces, but on Myrtle
Wilson’s face it seemed purposeless and inexplicable until I realized
that her eyes, wide with jealous terror, were fixed not on Tom, but on
Jordan Baker, whom she took to be his wife.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

There is no confusion like the confusion of a simple mind, and as we
drove away Tom was feeling the hot whips of panic. His wife and his
mistress, until an hour ago secure and inviolate, were slipping
precipitately from his control. Instinct made him step on the
accelerator with the double purpose of overtaking Daisy and leaving
Wilson behind, and we sped along toward Astoria at fifty miles an
hour, until, among the spidery girders of the elevated, we came in
sight of the easygoing blue coupé.

“Those big movies around Fiftieth Street are cool,” suggested
Jordan. “I love New York on summer afternoons when everyone’s away.
There’s something very sensuous about it—overripe, as if all sorts of
funny fruits were going to fall into your hands.”

The word “sensuous” had the effect of further disquieting Tom, but
before he could invent a protest the coupé came to a stop, and Daisy
signalled us to draw up alongside.

“Where are we going?” she cried.

“How about the movies?”

“It’s so hot,” she complained. “You go. We’ll ride around and meet you
after.” With an effort her wit rose faintly. “We’ll meet you on some
corner. I’ll be the man smoking two cigarettes.”

“We can’t argue about it here,” Tom said impatiently, as a truck gave
out a cursing whistle behind us. “You follow me to the south side of
Central Park, in front of the Plaza.”

Several times he turned his head and looked back for their car, and if
the traffic delayed them he slowed up until they came into sight. I
think he was afraid they would dart down a side-street and out of his
life forever.

But they didn’t. And we all took the less explicable step of engaging
the parlour of a suite in the Plaza Hotel.

The prolonged and tumultuous argument that ended by herding us into
that room eludes me, though I have a sharp physical memory that, in
the course of it, my underwear kept climbing like a damp snake around
my legs and intermittent beads of sweat raced cool across my back.
The notion originated with Daisy’s suggestion that we hire five
bathrooms and take cold baths, and then assumed more tangible form as
“a place to have a mint julep.” Each of us said over and over that it
was a “crazy idea”—we all talked at once to a baffled clerk and
thought, or pretended to think, that we were being very funny …

The room was large and stifling, and, though it was already four
o’clock, opening the windows admitted only a gust of hot shrubbery
from the Park. Daisy went to the mirror and stood with her back to us,
fixing her hair.

“It’s a swell suite,” whispered Jordan respectfully, and everyone
laughed.

“Open another window,” commanded Daisy, without turning around.

“There aren’t any more.”

“Well, we’d better telephone for an axe—”

“The thing to do is to forget about the heat,” said Tom impatiently.
“You make it ten times worse by crabbing about it.”

He unrolled the bottle of whisky from the towel and put it on the
table.

“Why not let her alone, old sport?” remarked Gatsby. “You’re the one
that wanted to come to town.”

There was a moment of silence. The telephone book slipped from its
nail and splashed to the floor, whereupon Jordan whispered, “Excuse
me”—but this time no one laughed.

“I’ll pick it up,” I offered.

“I’ve got it.” Gatsby examined the parted string, muttered “Hum!” in
an interested way, and tossed the book on a chair.

“That’s a great expression of yours, isn’t it?” said Tom sharply.

“What is?”

“All this ‘old sport’ business. Where’d you pick that up?”

“Now see here, Tom,” said Daisy, turning around from the mirror, “if
you’re going to make personal remarks I won’t stay here a minute.
Call up and order some ice for the mint julep.”

As Tom took up the receiver the compressed heat exploded into sound
and we were listening to the portentous chords of Mendelssohn’s
Wedding March from the ballroom below.

“Imagine marrying anybody in this heat!” cried Jordan dismally.

“Still—I was married in the middle of June,” Daisy remembered.
“Louisville in June! Somebody fainted. Who was it fainted, Tom?”

“Biloxi,” he answered shortly.

“A man named Biloxi. ‘Blocks’ Biloxi, and he made boxes—that’s a
fact—and he was from Biloxi, Tennessee.”

“They carried him into my house,” appended Jordan, “because we lived
just two doors from the church. And he stayed three weeks, until Daddy
told him he had to get out. The day after he left Daddy died.”  After
a moment she added. “There wasn’t any connection.”

“I used to know a Bill Biloxi from Memphis,” I remarked.

“That was his cousin. I knew his whole family history before he
left. He gave me an aluminium putter that I use today.”

The music had died down as the ceremony began and now a long cheer
floated in at the window, followed by intermittent cries of
“Yea—ea—ea!” and finally by a burst of jazz as the dancing began.

“We’re getting old,” said Daisy. “If we were young we’d rise and
dance.”

“Remember Biloxi,” Jordan warned her. “Where’d you know him, Tom?”

“Biloxi?” He concentrated with an effort. “I didn’t know him. He was a
friend of Daisy’s.”

“He was not,” she denied. “I’d never seen him before. He came down in
the private car.”

“Well, he said he knew you. He said he was raised in Louisville. Asa
Bird brought him around at the last minute and asked if we had room
for him.”

Jordan smiled.

“He was probably bumming his way home. He told me he was president of
your class at Yale.”

Tom and I looked at each other blankly.

“Biloxi?”

“First place, we didn’t have any president—”

Gatsby’s foot beat a short, restless tattoo and Tom eyed him suddenly.

“By the way, Mr. Gatsby, I understand you’re an Oxford man.”

“Not exactly.”

“Oh, yes, I understand you went to Oxford.”

“Yes—I went there.”

A pause. Then Tom’s voice, incredulous and insulting:

“You must have gone there about the time Biloxi went to New Haven.”

Another pause. A waiter knocked and came in with crushed mint and ice
but the silence was unbroken by his “thank you” and the soft closing
of the door. This tremendous detail was to be cleared up at last.

“I told you I went there,” said Gatsby.

“I heard you, but I’d like to know when.”

“It was in nineteen-nineteen, I only stayed five months. That’s why I
can’t really call myself an Oxford man.”

Tom glanced around to see if we mirrored his unbelief. But we were all
looking at Gatsby.

“It was an opportunity they gave to some of the officers after the
armistice,” he continued. “We could go to any of the universities in
England or France.”

I wanted to get up and slap him on the back. I had one of those
renewals of complete faith in him that I’d experienced before.

Daisy rose, smiling faintly, and went to the table.

“Open the whisky, Tom,” she ordered, “and I’ll make you a mint julep.
Then you won’t seem so stupid to yourself … Look at the mint!”

“Wait a minute,” snapped Tom, “I want to ask Mr. Gatsby one more
question.”

“Go on,” Gatsby said politely.

“What kind of a row are you trying to cause in my house anyhow?”

They were out in the open at last and Gatsby was content.

“He isn’t causing a row,” Daisy looked desperately from one to the
other. “You’re causing a row. Please have a little self-control.”

“Self-control!” repeated Tom incredulously. “I suppose the latest
thing is to sit back and let Mr. Nobody from Nowhere make love to your
wife. Well, if that’s the idea you can count me out … Nowadays people
begin by sneering at family life and family institutions, and next
they’ll throw everything overboard and have intermarriage between
black and white.”

Flushed with his impassioned gibberish, he saw himself standing alone
on the last barrier of civilization.

“We’re all white here,” murmured Jordan.

“I know I’m not very popular. I don’t give big parties. I suppose
you’ve got to make your house into a pigsty in order to have any
friends—in the modern world.”

Angry as I was, as we all were, I was tempted to laugh whenever he
opened his mouth. The transition from libertine to prig was so
complete.

“I’ve got something to tell you, old sport—” began Gatsby. But Daisy
guessed at his intention.

“Please don’t!” she interrupted helplessly. “Please let’s all go
home. Why don’t we all go home?”

“That’s a good idea,” I got up. “Come on, Tom. Nobody wants a drink.”

“I want to know what Mr. Gatsby has to tell me.”

“Your wife doesn’t love you,” said Gatsby. “She’s never loved you.
She loves me.”

“You must be crazy!” exclaimed Tom automatically.

Gatsby sprang to his feet, vivid with excitement.

“She never loved you, do you hear?” he cried. “She only married you
because I was poor and she was tired of waiting for me. It was a
terrible mistake, but in her heart she never loved anyone except me!”

At this point Jordan and I tried to go, but Tom and Gatsby insisted
with competitive firmness that we remain—as though neither of them had
anything to conceal and it would be a privilege to partake vicariously
of their emotions.

“Sit down, Daisy,” Tom’s voice groped unsuccessfully for the paternal
note. “What’s been going on? I want to hear all about it.”

“I told you what’s been going on,” said Gatsby. “Going on for five
years—and you didn’t know.”

Tom turned to Daisy sharply.

“You’ve been seeing this fellow for five years?”

“Not seeing,” said Gatsby. “No, we couldn’t meet. But both of us loved
each other all that time, old sport, and you didn’t know. I used to
laugh sometimes”—but there was no laughter in his eyes—“to think that
you didn’t know.”

“Oh—that’s all.” Tom tapped his thick fingers together like a
clergyman and leaned back in his chair.

“You’re crazy!” he exploded. “I can’t speak about what happened five
years ago, because I didn’t know Daisy then—and I’ll be damned if I
see how you got within a mile of her unless you brought the groceries
to the back door. But all the rest of that’s a God damned lie. Daisy
loved me when she married me and she loves me now.”

“No,” said Gatsby, shaking his head.

“She does, though. The trouble is that sometimes she gets foolish
ideas in her head and doesn’t know what she’s doing.” He nodded
sagely. “And what’s more, I love Daisy too. Once in a while I go off
on a spree and make a fool of myself, but I always come back, and in
my heart I love her all the time.”

“You’re revolting,” said Daisy. She turned to me, and her voice,
dropping an octave lower, filled the room with thrilling scorn: “Do
you know why we left Chicago? I’m surprised that they didn’t treat you
to the story of that little spree.”

Gatsby walked over and stood beside her.

“Daisy, that’s all over now,” he said earnestly. “It doesn’t matter
any more. Just tell him the truth—that you never loved him—and it’s
all wiped out forever.”

She looked at him blindly. “Why—how could I love him—possibly?”

“You never loved him.”

She hesitated. Her eyes fell on Jordan and me with a sort of appeal,
as though she realized at last what she was doing—and as though she
had never, all along, intended doing anything at all. But it was done
now. It was too late.

“I never loved him,” she said, with perceptible reluctance.

“Not at Kapiolani?” demanded Tom suddenly.

“No.”

From the ballroom beneath, muffled and suffocating chords were
drifting up on hot waves of air.

“Not that day I carried you down from the Punch Bowl to keep your
shoes dry?” There was a husky tenderness in his tone … “Daisy?”

“Please don’t.” Her voice was cold, but the rancour was gone from it.
She looked at Gatsby. “There, Jay,” she said—but her hand as she tried
to light a cigarette was trembling. Suddenly she threw the cigarette
and the burning match on the carpet.

“Oh, you want too much!” she cried to Gatsby. “I love you now—isn’t
that enough? I can’t help what’s past.” She began to sob
helplessly. “I did love him once—but I loved you too.”

Gatsby’s eyes opened and closed.

“You loved me too?” he repeated.

“Even that’s a lie,” said Tom savagely. “She didn’t know you were
alive. Why—there’s things between Daisy and me that you’ll never know,
things that neither of us can ever forget.”

The words seemed to bite physically into Gatsby.

“I want to speak to Daisy alone,” he insisted. “She’s all excited
now—”

“Even alone I can’t say I never loved Tom,” she admitted in a pitiful
voice. “It wouldn’t be true.”

“Of course it wouldn’t,” agreed Tom.

She turned to her husband.

“As if it mattered to you,” she said.

“Of course it matters. I’m going to take better care of you from now
on.”

“You don’t understand,” said Gatsby, with a touch of panic. “You’re
not going to take care of her any more.”

“I’m not?” Tom opened his eyes wide and laughed. He could afford to
control himself now. “Why’s that?”

“Daisy’s leaving you.”

“Nonsense.”

“I am, though,” she said with a visible effort.

“She’s not leaving me!” Tom’s words suddenly leaned down over Gatsby.
“Certainly not for a common swindler who’d have to steal the ring he
put on her finger.”

“I won’t stand this!” cried Daisy. “Oh, please let’s get out.”

“Who are you, anyhow?” broke out Tom. “You’re one of that bunch that
hangs around with Meyer Wolfshiem—that much I happen to know. I’ve
made a little investigation into your affairs—and I’ll carry it
further tomorrow.”

“You can suit yourself about that, old sport,” said Gatsby steadily.

“I found out what your ‘drugstores’ were.” He turned to us and spoke
rapidly. “He and this Wolfshiem bought up a lot of side-street
drugstores here and in Chicago and sold grain alcohol over the
counter. That’s one of his little stunts. I picked him for a
bootlegger the first time I saw him, and I wasn’t far wrong.”

“What about it?” said Gatsby politely. “I guess your friend Walter
Chase wasn’t too proud to come in on it.”

“And you left him in the lurch, didn’t you? You let him go to jail for
a month over in New Jersey. God! You ought to hear Walter on the
subject of you.”

“He came to us dead broke. He was very glad to pick up some money, old
sport.”

“Don’t you call me ‘old sport’!” cried Tom. Gatsby said
nothing. “Walter could have you up on the betting laws too, but
Wolfshiem scared him into shutting his mouth.”

That unfamiliar yet recognizable look was back again in Gatsby’s face.

“That drugstore business was just small change,” continued Tom slowly,
“but you’ve got something on now that Walter’s afraid to tell me
about.”

I glanced at Daisy, who was staring terrified between Gatsby and her
husband, and at Jordan, who had begun to balance an invisible but
absorbing object on the tip of her chin. Then I turned back to
Gatsby—and was startled at his expression. He looked—and this is said
in all contempt for the babbled slander of his garden—as if he had
“killed a man.” For a moment the set of his face could be described in
just that fantastic way.

It passed, and he began to talk excitedly to Daisy, denying
everything, defending his name against accusations that had not been
made. But with every word she was drawing further and further into
herself, so he gave that up, and only the dead dream fought on as the
afternoon slipped away, trying to touch what was no longer tangible,
struggling unhappily, undespairingly, toward that lost voice across
the room.

The voice begged again to go.

“Please, Tom! I can’t stand this any more.”

Her frightened eyes told that whatever intentions, whatever courage
she had had, were definitely gone.

“You two start on home, Daisy,” said Tom. “In Mr. Gatsby’s car.”

She looked at Tom, alarmed now, but he insisted with magnanimous
scorn.

“Go on. He won’t annoy you. I think he realizes that his presumptuous
little flirtation is over.”

They were gone, without a word, snapped out, made accidental,
isolated, like ghosts, even from our pity.

After a moment Tom got up and began wrapping the unopened bottle of
whisky in the towel.

“Want any of this stuff? Jordan? … Nick?”

I didn’t answer.

“Nick?” He asked again.

“What?”

“Want any?”

“No … I just remembered that today’s my birthday.”

I was thirty. Before me stretched the portentous, menacing road of a
new decade.

It was seven o’clock when we got into the coupé with him and started
for Long Island. Tom talked incessantly, exulting and laughing, but
his voice was as remote from Jordan and me as the foreign clamour on
the sidewalk or the tumult of the elevated overhead. Human sympathy
has its limits, and we were content to let all their tragic arguments
fade with the city lights behind. Thirty—the promise of a decade of
loneliness, a thinning list of single men to know, a thinning
briefcase of enthusiasm, thinning hair. But there was Jordan beside
me, who, unlike Daisy, was too wise ever to carry well-forgotten
dreams from age to age. As we passed over the dark bridge her wan face
fell lazily against my coat’s shoulder and the formidable stroke of
thirty died away with the reassuring pressure of her hand.

So we drove on toward death through the cooling twilight.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The young Greek, Michaelis, who ran the coffee joint beside the
ash-heaps was the principal witness at the inquest. He had slept
through the heat until after five, when he strolled over to the
garage, and found George Wilson sick in his office—really sick, pale
as his own pale hair and shaking all over. Michaelis advised him to go
to bed, but Wilson refused, saying that he’d miss a lot of business if
he did. While his neighbour was trying to persuade him a violent
racket broke out overhead.

“I’ve got my wife locked in up there,” explained Wilson calmly.
“She’s going to stay there till the day after tomorrow, and then we’re
going to move away.”

Michaelis was astonished; they had been neighbours for four years, and
Wilson had never seemed faintly capable of such a statement.
Generally he was one of these worn-out men: when he wasn’t working, he
sat on a chair in the doorway and stared at the people and the cars
that passed along the road. When anyone spoke to him he invariably
laughed in an agreeable, colourless way. He was his wife’s man and not
his own.

So naturally Michaelis tried to find out what had happened, but Wilson
wouldn’t say a word—instead he began to throw curious, suspicious
glances at his visitor and ask him what he’d been doing at certain
times on certain days. Just as the latter was getting uneasy, some
workmen came past the door bound for his restaurant, and Michaelis
took the opportunity to get away, intending to come back later. But he
didn’t. He supposed he forgot to, that’s all. When he came outside
again, a little after seven, he was reminded of the conversation
because he heard Mrs. Wilson’s voice, loud and scolding, downstairs in
the garage.

“Beat me!” he heard her cry. “Throw me down and beat me, you dirty
little coward!”

A moment later she rushed out into the dusk, waving her hands and
shouting—before he could move from his door the business was over.

The “death car” as the newspapers called it, didn’t stop; it came out
of the gathering darkness, wavered tragically for a moment, and then
disappeared around the next bend. Mavro Michaelis wasn’t even sure of
its colour—he told the first policeman that it was light green. The
other car, the one going toward New York, came to rest a hundred yards
beyond, and its driver hurried back to where Myrtle Wilson, her life
violently extinguished, knelt in the road and mingled her thick dark
blood with the dust.

Michaelis and this man reached her first, but when they had torn open
her shirtwaist, still damp with perspiration, they saw that her left
breast was swinging loose like a flap, and there was no need to listen
for the heart beneath. The mouth was wide open and ripped a little at
the corners, as though she had choked a little in giving up the
tremendous vitality she had stored so long.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We saw the three or four automobiles and the crowd when we were still
some distance away.

“Wreck!” said Tom. “That’s good. Wilson’ll have a little business at
last.”

He slowed down, but still without any intention of stopping, until, as
we came nearer, the hushed, intent faces of the people at the garage
door made him automatically put on the brakes.

“We’ll take a look,” he said doubtfully, “just a look.”

I became aware now of a hollow, wailing sound which issued incessantly
from the garage, a sound which as we got out of the coupé and walked
toward the door resolved itself into the words “Oh, my God!” uttered
over and over in a gasping moan.

“There’s some bad trouble here,” said Tom excitedly.

He reached up on tiptoes and peered over a circle of heads into the
garage, which was lit only by a yellow light in a swinging metal
basket overhead. Then he made a harsh sound in his throat, and with a
violent thrusting movement of his powerful arms pushed his way
through.

The circle closed up again with a running murmur of expostulation; it
was a minute before I could see anything at all. Then new arrivals
deranged the line, and Jordan and I were pushed suddenly inside.

Myrtle Wilson’s body, wrapped in a blanket, and then in another
blanket, as though she suffered from a chill in the hot night, lay on
a worktable by the wall, and Tom, with his back to us, was bending
over it, motionless. Next to him stood a motorcycle policeman taking
down names with much sweat and correction in a little book. At first I
couldn’t find the source of the high, groaning words that echoed
clamorously through the bare garage—then I saw Wilson standing on the
raised threshold of his office, swaying back and forth and holding to
the doorposts with both hands. Some man was talking to him in a low
voice and attempting, from time to time, to lay a hand on his
shoulder, but Wilson neither heard nor saw. His eyes would drop slowly
from the swinging light to the laden table by the wall, and then jerk
back to the light again, and he gave out incessantly his high,
horrible call:

“Oh, my Ga-od! Oh, my Ga-od! Oh, Ga-od! Oh, my Ga-od!”

Presently Tom lifted his head with a jerk and, after staring around
the garage with glazed eyes, addressed a mumbled incoherent remark to
the policeman.

“M-a-v—” the policeman was saying, “—o—”

“No, r—” corrected the man, “M-a-v-r-o—”

“Listen to me!” muttered Tom fiercely.

“r—” said the policeman, “o—”

“g—”

“g—” He looked up as Tom’s broad hand fell sharply on his shoulder.
“What you want, fella?”

“What happened?—that’s what I want to know.”

“Auto hit her. Ins’antly killed.”

“Instantly killed,” repeated Tom, staring.

“She ran out ina road. Son-of-a-bitch didn’t even stopus car.”

“There was two cars,” said Michaelis, “one comin’, one goin’, see?”

“Going where?” asked the policeman keenly.

“One goin’ each way. Well, she”—his hand rose toward the blankets but
stopped halfway and fell to his side—“she ran out there an’ the one
comin’ from N’York knock right into her, goin’ thirty or forty miles
an hour.”

“What’s the name of this place here?” demanded the officer.

“Hasn’t got any name.”

A pale well-dressed negro stepped near.

“It was a yellow car,” he said, “big yellow car. New.”

“See the accident?” asked the policeman.

“No, but the car passed me down the road, going faster’n forty. Going
fifty, sixty.”

“Come here and let’s have your name. Look out now. I want to get his
name.”

Some words of this conversation must have reached Wilson, swaying in
the office door, for suddenly a new theme found voice among his
grasping cries:

“You don’t have to tell me what kind of car it was! I know what kind
of car it was!”

Watching Tom, I saw the wad of muscle back of his shoulder tighten
under his coat. He walked quickly over to Wilson and, standing in
front of him, seized him firmly by the upper arms.

“You’ve got to pull yourself together,” he said with soothing
gruffness.

Wilson’s eyes fell upon Tom; he started up on his tiptoes and then
would have collapsed to his knees had not Tom held him upright.

“Listen,” said Tom, shaking him a little. “I just got here a minute
ago, from New York. I was bringing you that coupé we’ve been talking
about. That yellow car I was driving this afternoon wasn’t mine—do you
hear? I haven’t seen it all afternoon.”

Only the negro and I were near enough to hear what he said, but the
policeman caught something in the tone and looked over with truculent
eyes.

“What’s all that?” he demanded.

“I’m a friend of his.” Tom turned his head but kept his hands firm on
Wilson’s body. “He says he knows the car that did it … It was a yellow
car.”

Some dim impulse moved the policeman to look suspiciously at Tom.

“And what colour’s your car?”

“It’s a blue car, a coupé.”

“We’ve come straight from New York,” I said.

Someone who had been driving a little behind us confirmed this, and
the policeman turned away.

“Now, if you’ll let me have that name again correct—”

Picking up Wilson like a doll, Tom carried him into the office, set
him down in a chair, and came back.

“If somebody’ll come here and sit with him,” he snapped
authoritatively. He watched while the two men standing closest glanced
at each other and went unwillingly into the room. Then Tom shut the
door on them and came down the single step, his eyes avoiding the
table. As he passed close to me he whispered: “Let’s get out.”

Self-consciously, with his authoritative arms breaking the way, we
pushed through the still gathering crowd, passing a hurried doctor,
case in hand, who had been sent for in wild hope half an hour ago.

Tom drove slowly until we were beyond the bend—then his foot came down
hard, and the coupé raced along through the night. In a little while I
heard a low husky sob, and saw that the tears were overflowing down
his face.

“The God damned coward!” he whimpered. “He didn’t even stop his car.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Buchanans’ house floated suddenly toward us through the dark
rustling trees. Tom stopped beside the porch and looked up at the
second floor, where two windows bloomed with light among the vines.

“Daisy’s home,” he said. As we got out of the car he glanced at me and
frowned slightly.

“I ought to have dropped you in West Egg, Nick. There’s nothing we can
do tonight.”

A change had come over him, and he spoke gravely, and with decision.
As we walked across the moonlight gravel to the porch he disposed of
the situation in a few brisk phrases.

“I’ll telephone for a taxi to take you home, and while you’re waiting
you and Jordan better go in the kitchen and have them get you some
supper—if you want any.” He opened the door. “Come in.”

“No, thanks. But I’d be glad if you’d order me the taxi. I’ll wait
outside.”

Jordan put her hand on my arm.

“Won’t you come in, Nick?”

“No, thanks.”

I was feeling a little sick and I wanted to be alone. But Jordan
lingered for a moment more.

“It’s only half-past nine,” she said.

I’d be damned if I’d go in; I’d had enough of all of them for one day,
and suddenly that included Jordan too. She must have seen something of
this in my expression, for she turned abruptly away and ran up the
porch steps into the house. I sat down for a few minutes with my head
in my hands, until I heard the phone taken up inside and the butler’s
voice calling a taxi. Then I walked slowly down the drive away from
the house, intending to wait by the gate.

I hadn’t gone twenty yards when I heard my name and Gatsby stepped
from between two bushes into the path. I must have felt pretty weird
by that time, because I could think of nothing except the luminosity
of his pink suit under the moon.

“What are you doing?” I inquired.

“Just standing here, old sport.”

Somehow, that seemed a despicable occupation. For all I knew he was
going to rob the house in a moment; I wouldn’t have been surprised to
see sinister faces, the faces of “Wolfshiem’s people,” behind him in
the dark shrubbery.

“Did you see any trouble on the road?” he asked after a minute.

“Yes.”

He hesitated.

“Was she killed?”

“Yes.”

“I thought so; I told Daisy I thought so. It’s better that the shock
should all come at once. She stood it pretty well.”

He spoke as if Daisy’s reaction was the only thing that mattered.

“I got to West Egg by a side road,” he went on, “and left the car in
my garage. I don’t think anybody saw us, but of course I can’t be
sure.”

I disliked him so much by this time that I didn’t find it necessary to
tell him he was wrong.

“Who was the woman?” he inquired.

“Her name was Wilson. Her husband owns the garage. How the devil did
it happen?”

“Well, I tried to swing the wheel—” He broke off, and suddenly I
guessed at the truth.

“Was Daisy driving?”

“Yes,” he said after a moment, “but of course I’ll say I was. You see,
when we left New York she was very nervous and she thought it would
steady her to drive—and this woman rushed out at us just as we were
passing a car coming the other way. It all happened in a minute, but
it seemed to me that she wanted to speak to us, thought we were
somebody she knew. Well, first Daisy turned away from the woman toward
the other car, and then she lost her nerve and turned back. The second
my hand reached the wheel I felt the shock—it must have killed her
instantly.”

“It ripped her open—”

“Don’t tell me, old sport.” He winced. “Anyhow—Daisy stepped on it. I
tried to make her stop, but she couldn’t, so I pulled on the emergency
brake. Then she fell over into my lap and I drove on.

“She’ll be all right tomorrow,” he said presently. “I’m just going to
wait here and see if he tries to bother her about that unpleasantness
this afternoon. She’s locked herself into her room, and if he tries
any brutality she’s going to turn the light out and on again.”

“He won’t touch her,” I said. “He’s not thinking about her.”

“I don’t trust him, old sport.”

“How long are you going to wait?”

“All night, if necessary. Anyhow, till they all go to bed.”

A new point of view occurred to me. Suppose Tom found out that Daisy
had been driving. He might think he saw a connection in it—he might
think anything. I looked at the house; there were two or three bright
windows downstairs and the pink glow from Daisy’s room on the ground
floor.

“You wait here,” I said. “I’ll see if there’s any sign of a
commotion.”

I walked back along the border of the lawn, traversed the gravel
softly, and tiptoed up the veranda steps. The drawing-room curtains
were open, and I saw that the room was empty. Crossing the porch where
we had dined that June night three months before, I came to a small
rectangle of light which I guessed was the pantry window. The blind
was drawn, but I found a rift at the sill.

Daisy and Tom were sitting opposite each other at the kitchen table,
with a plate of cold fried chicken between them, and two bottles of
ale. He was talking intently across the table at her, and in his
earnestness his hand had fallen upon and covered her own. Once in a
while she looked up at him and nodded in agreement.

They weren’t happy, and neither of them had touched the chicken or the
ale—and yet they weren’t unhappy either. There was an unmistakable air
of natural intimacy about the picture, and anybody would have said
that they were conspiring together.

As I tiptoed from the porch I heard my taxi feeling its way along the
dark road toward the house. Gatsby was waiting where I had left him in
the drive.

“Is it all quiet up there?” he asked anxiously.

“Yes, it’s all quiet.” I hesitated. “You’d better come home and get
some sleep.”

He shook his head.

“I want to wait here till Daisy goes to bed. Good night, old sport.”

He put his hands in his coat pockets and turned back eagerly to his
scrutiny of the house, as though my presence marred the sacredness of
the vigil. So I walked away and left him standing there in the
moonlight—watching over nothing.


                                 VIII

I couldn’t sleep all night; a foghorn was groaning incessantly on the
Sound, and I tossed half-sick between grotesque reality and savage,
frightening dreams. Toward dawn I heard a taxi go up Gatsby’s drive,
and immediately I jumped out of bed and began to dress—I felt that I
had something to tell him, something to warn him about, and morning
would be too late.

Crossing his lawn, I saw that his front door was still open and he was
leaning against a table in the hall, heavy with dejection or sleep.

“Nothing happened,” he said wanly. “I waited, and about four o’clock
she came to the window and stood there for a minute and then turned
out the light.”

His house had never seemed so enormous to me as it did that night when
we hunted through the great rooms for cigarettes. We pushed aside
curtains that were like pavilions, and felt over innumerable feet of
dark wall for electric light switches—once I tumbled with a sort of
splash upon the keys of a ghostly piano. There was an inexplicable
amount of dust everywhere, and the rooms were musty, as though they
hadn’t been aired for many days. I found the humidor on an unfamiliar
table, with two stale, dry cigarettes inside. Throwing open the French
windows of the drawing-room, we sat smoking out into the darkness.

“You ought to go away,” I said. “It’s pretty certain they’ll trace
your car.”

“Go away now, old sport?”

“Go to Atlantic City for a week, or up to Montreal.”

He wouldn’t consider it. He couldn’t possibly leave Daisy until he
knew what she was going to do. He was clutching at some last hope and
I couldn’t bear to shake him free.

It was this night that he told me the strange story of his youth with
Dan Cody—told it to me because “Jay Gatsby” had broken up like glass
against Tom’s hard malice, and the long secret extravaganza was played
out. I think that he would have acknowledged anything now, without
reserve, but he wanted to talk about Daisy.

She was the first “nice” girl he had ever known. In various unrevealed
capacities he had come in contact with such people, but always with
indiscernible barbed wire between. He found her excitingly
desirable. He went to her house, at first with other officers from
Camp Taylor, then alone. It amazed him—he had never been in such a
beautiful house before. But what gave it an air of breathless
intensity, was that Daisy lived there—it was as casual a thing to her
as his tent out at camp was to him. There was a ripe mystery about it,
a hint of bedrooms upstairs more beautiful and cool than other
bedrooms, of gay and radiant activities taking place through its
corridors, and of romances that were not musty and laid away already
in lavender but fresh and breathing and redolent of this year’s
shining motorcars and of dances whose flowers were scarcely
withered. It excited him, too, that many men had already loved
Daisy—it increased her value in his eyes. He felt their presence all
about the house, pervading the air with the shades and echoes of still
vibrant emotions.

But he knew that he was in Daisy’s house by a colossal
accident. However glorious might be his future as Jay Gatsby, he was
at present a penniless young man without a past, and at any moment the
invisible cloak of his uniform might slip from his shoulders. So he
made the most of his time. He took what he could get, ravenously and
unscrupulously—eventually he took Daisy one still October night, took
her because he had no real right to touch her hand.

He might have despised himself, for he had certainly taken her under
false pretences. I don’t mean that he had traded on his phantom
millions, but he had deliberately given Daisy a sense of security; he
let her believe that he was a person from much the same strata as
herself—that he was fully able to take care of her. As a matter of
fact, he had no such facilities—he had no comfortable family standing
behind him, and he was liable at the whim of an impersonal government
to be blown anywhere about the world.

But he didn’t despise himself and it didn’t turn out as he had
imagined. He had intended, probably, to take what he could and go—but
now he found that he had committed himself to the following of a
grail. He knew that Daisy was extraordinary, but he didn’t realize
just how extraordinary a “nice” girl could be. She vanished into her
rich house, into her rich, full life, leaving Gatsby—nothing. He felt
married to her, that was all.

When they met again, two days later, it was Gatsby who was breathless,
who was, somehow, betrayed. Her porch was bright with the bought
luxury of star-shine; the wicker of the settee squeaked fashionably as
she turned toward him and he kissed her curious and lovely mouth. She
had caught a cold, and it made her voice huskier and more charming
than ever, and Gatsby was overwhelmingly aware of the youth and
mystery that wealth imprisons and preserves, of the freshness of many
clothes, and of Daisy, gleaming like silver, safe and proud above the
hot struggles of the poor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

“I can’t describe to you how surprised I was to find out I loved her,
old sport. I even hoped for a while that she’d throw me over, but she
didn’t, because she was in love with me too. She thought I knew a lot
because I knew different things from her … Well, there I was, way off
my ambitions, getting deeper in love every minute, and all of a sudden
I didn’t care. What was the use of doing great things if I could have
a better time telling her what I was going to do?”

On the last afternoon before he went abroad, he sat with Daisy in his
arms for a long, silent time. It was a cold fall day, with fire in the
room and her cheeks flushed. Now and then she moved and he changed his
arm a little, and once he kissed her dark shining hair. The afternoon
had made them tranquil for a while, as if to give them a deep memory
for the long parting the next day promised. They had never been closer
in their month of love, nor communicated more profoundly one with
another, than when she brushed silent lips against his coat’s shoulder
or when he touched the end of her fingers, gently, as though she were
asleep.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

He did extraordinarily well in the war. He was a captain before he
went to the front, and following the Argonne battles he got his
majority and the command of the divisional machine-guns. After the
armistice he tried frantically to get home, but some complication or
misunderstanding sent him to Oxford instead. He was worried now—there
was a quality of nervous despair in Daisy’s letters. She didn’t see
why he couldn’t come. She was feeling the pressure of the world
outside, and she wanted to see him and feel his presence beside her
and be reassured that she was doing the right thing after all.

For Daisy was young and her artificial world was redolent of orchids
and pleasant, cheerful snobbery and orchestras which set the rhythm of
the year, summing up the sadness and suggestiveness of life in new
tunes. All night the saxophones wailed the hopeless comment of the
“Beale Street Blues” while a hundred pairs of golden and silver
slippers shuffled the shining dust. At the grey tea hour there were
always rooms that throbbed incessantly with this low, sweet fever,
while fresh faces drifted here and there like rose petals blown by the
sad horns around the floor.

Through this twilight universe Daisy began to move again with the
season; suddenly she was again keeping half a dozen dates a day with
half a dozen men, and drowsing asleep at dawn with the beads and
chiffon of an evening-dress tangled among dying orchids on the floor
beside her bed. And all the time something within her was crying for a
decision. She wanted her life shaped now, immediately—and the decision
must be made by some force—of love, of money, of unquestionable
practicality—that was close at hand.

That force took shape in the middle of spring with the arrival of Tom
Buchanan. There was a wholesome bulkiness about his person and his
position, and Daisy was flattered. Doubtless there was a certain
struggle and a certain relief. The letter reached Gatsby while he was
still at Oxford.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

It was dawn now on Long Island and we went about opening the rest of
the windows downstairs, filling the house with grey-turning,
gold-turning light. The shadow of a tree fell abruptly across the dew
and ghostly birds began to sing among the blue leaves. There was a
slow, pleasant movement in the air, scarcely a wind, promising a cool,
lovely day.

“I don’t think she ever loved him.” Gatsby turned around from a window
and looked at me challengingly. “You must remember, old sport, she was
very excited this afternoon. He told her those things in a way that
frightened her—that made it look as if I was some kind of cheap
sharper. And the result was she hardly knew what she was saying.”

He sat down gloomily.

“Of course she might have loved him just for a minute, when they were
first married—and loved me more even then, do you see?”

Suddenly he came out with a curious remark.

“In any case,” he said, “it was just personal.”

What could you make of that, except to suspect some intensity in his
conception of the affair that couldn’t be measured?

He came back from France when Tom and Daisy were still on their
wedding trip, and made a miserable but irresistible journey to
Louisville on the last of his army pay. He stayed there a week,
walking the streets where their footsteps had clicked together through
the November night and revisiting the out-of-the-way places to which
they had driven in her white car. Just as Daisy’s house had always
seemed to him more mysterious and gay than other houses, so his idea
of the city itself, even though she was gone from it, was pervaded
with a melancholy beauty.

He left feeling that if he had searched harder, he might have found
her—that he was leaving her behind. The day-coach—he was penniless
now—was hot. He went out to the open vestibule and sat down on a
folding-chair, and the station slid away and the backs of unfamiliar
buildings moved by. Then out into the spring fields, where a yellow
trolley raced them for a minute with people in it who might once have
seen the pale magic of her face along the casual street.

The track curved and now it was going away from the sun, which, as it
sank lower, seemed to spread itself in benediction over the vanishing
city where she had drawn her breath. He stretched out his hand
desperately as if to snatch only a wisp of air, to save a fragment of
the spot that she had made lovely for him. But it was all going by too
fast now for his blurred eyes and he knew that he had lost that part
of it, the freshest and the best, forever.

It was nine o’clock when we finished breakfast and went out on the
porch. The night had made a sharp difference in the weather and there
was an autumn flavour in the air. The gardener, the last one of
Gatsby’s former servants, came to the foot of the steps.

“I’m going to drain the pool today, Mr. Gatsby. Leaves’ll start
falling pretty soon, and then there’s always trouble with the pipes.”

“Don’t do it today,” Gatsby answered. He turned to me apologetically.
“You know, old sport, I’ve never used that pool all summer?”

I looked at my watch and stood up.

“Twelve minutes to my train.”

I didn’t want to go to the city. I wasn’t worth a decent stroke of
work, but it was more than that—I didn’t want to leave Gatsby. I
missed that train, and then another, before I could get myself away.

“I’ll call you up,” I said finally.

“Do, old sport.”

“I’ll call you about noon.”

We walked slowly down the steps.

“I suppose Daisy’ll call too.” He looked at me anxiously, as if he
hoped I’d corroborate this.

“I suppose so.”

“Well, goodbye.”

We shook hands and I started away. Just before I reached the hedge I
remembered something and turned around.

“They’re a rotten crowd,” I shouted across the lawn. “You’re worth the
whole damn bunch put together.”

I’ve always been glad I said that. It was the only compliment I ever
gave him, because I disapproved of him from beginning to end. First he
nodded politely, and then his face broke into that radiant and
understanding smile, as if we’d been in ecstatic cahoots on that fact
all the time. His gorgeous pink rag of a suit made a bright spot of
colour against the white steps, and I thought of the night when I
first came to his ancestral home, three months before. The lawn and
drive had been crowded with the faces of those who guessed at his
corruption—and he had stood on those steps, concealing his
incorruptible dream, as he waved them goodbye.

I thanked him for his hospitality. We were always thanking him for
that—I and the others.

“Goodbye,” I called. “I enjoyed breakfast, Gatsby.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Up in the city, I tried for a while to list the quotations on an
interminable amount of stock, then I fell asleep in my swivel-chair.
Just before noon the phone woke me, and I started up with sweat
breaking out on my forehead. It was Jordan Baker; she often called me
up at this hour because the uncertainty of her own movements between
hotels and clubs and private houses made her hard to find in any other
way. Usually her voice came over the wire as something fresh and cool,
as if a divot from a green golf-links had come sailing in at the
office window, but this morning it seemed harsh and dry.

“I’ve left Daisy’s house,” she said. “I’m at Hempstead, and I’m going
down to Southampton this afternoon.”

Probably it had been tactful to leave Daisy’s house, but the act
annoyed me, and her next remark made me rigid.

“You weren’t so nice to me last night.”

“How could it have mattered then?”

Silence for a moment. Then:

“However—I want to see you.”

“I want to see you, too.”

“Suppose I don’t go to Southampton, and come into town this
afternoon?”

“No—I don’t think this afternoon.”

“Very well.”

“It’s impossible this afternoon. Various—”

We talked like that for a while, and then abruptly we weren’t talking
any longer. I don’t know which of us hung up with a sharp click, but I
know I didn’t care. I couldn’t have talked to her across a tea-table
that day if I never talked to her again in this world.

I called Gatsby’s house a few minutes later, but the line was busy. I
tried four times; finally an exasperated central told me the wire was
being kept open for long distance from Detroit. Taking out my
timetable, I drew a small circle around the three-fifty train. Then I
leaned back in my chair and tried to think. It was just noon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When I passed the ash-heaps on the train that morning I had crossed
deliberately to the other side of the car. I supposed there’d be a
curious crowd around there all day with little boys searching for dark
spots in the dust, and some garrulous man telling over and over what
had happened, until it became less and less real even to him and he
could tell it no longer, and Myrtle Wilson’s tragic achievement was
forgotten. Now I want to go back a little and tell what happened at
the garage after we left there the night before.

They had difficulty in locating the sister, Catherine. She must have
broken her rule against drinking that night, for when she arrived she
was stupid with liquor and unable to understand that the ambulance had
already gone to Flushing. When they convinced her of this, she
immediately fainted, as if that was the intolerable part of the
affair. Someone, kind or curious, took her in his car and drove her in
the wake of her sister’s body.

Until long after midnight a changing crowd lapped up against the front
of the garage, while George Wilson rocked himself back and forth on
the couch inside. For a while the door of the office was open, and
everyone who came into the garage glanced irresistibly through it.
Finally someone said it was a shame, and closed the door. Michaelis
and several other men were with him; first, four or five men, later
two or three men. Still later Michaelis had to ask the last stranger
to wait there fifteen minutes longer, while he went back to his own
place and made a pot of coffee. After that, he stayed there alone with
Wilson until dawn.

About three o’clock the quality of Wilson’s incoherent muttering
changed—he grew quieter and began to talk about the yellow car. He
announced that he had a way of finding out whom the yellow car
belonged to, and then he blurted out that a couple of months ago his
wife had come from the city with her face bruised and her nose
swollen.

But when he heard himself say this, he flinched and began to cry “Oh,
my God!” again in his groaning voice. Michaelis made a clumsy attempt
to distract him.

“How long have you been married, George? Come on there, try and sit
still a minute, and answer my question. How long have you been
married?”

“Twelve years.”

“Ever had any children? Come on, George, sit still—I asked you a
question. Did you ever have any children?”

The hard brown beetles kept thudding against the dull light, and
whenever Michaelis heard a car go tearing along the road outside it
sounded to him like the car that hadn’t stopped a few hours before.
He didn’t like to go into the garage, because the work bench was
stained where the body had been lying, so he moved uncomfortably
around the office—he knew every object in it before morning—and from
time to time sat down beside Wilson trying to keep him more quiet.

“Have you got a church you go to sometimes, George? Maybe even if you
haven’t been there for a long time? Maybe I could call up the church
and get a priest to come over and he could talk to you, see?”

“Don’t belong to any.”

“You ought to have a church, George, for times like this. You must
have gone to church once. Didn’t you get married in a church? Listen,
George, listen to me. Didn’t you get married in a church?”

“That was a long time ago.”

The effort of answering broke the rhythm of his rocking—for a moment
he was silent. Then the same half-knowing, half-bewildered look came
back into his faded eyes.

“Look in the drawer there,” he said, pointing at the desk.

“Which drawer?”

“That drawer—that one.”

Michaelis opened the drawer nearest his hand. There was nothing in it
but a small, expensive dog-leash, made of leather and braided
silver. It was apparently new.

“This?” he inquired, holding it up.

Wilson stared and nodded.

“I found it yesterday afternoon. She tried to tell me about it, but I
knew it was something funny.”

“You mean your wife bought it?”

“She had it wrapped in tissue paper on her bureau.”

Michaelis didn’t see anything odd in that, and he gave Wilson a dozen
reasons why his wife might have bought the dog-leash. But conceivably
Wilson had heard some of these same explanations before, from Myrtle,
because he began saying “Oh, my God!” again in a whisper—his comforter
left several explanations in the air.

“Then he killed her,” said Wilson. His mouth dropped open suddenly.

“Who did?”

“I have a way of finding out.”

“You’re morbid, George,” said his friend. “This has been a strain to
you and you don’t know what you’re saying. You’d better try and sit
quiet till morning.”

“He murdered her.”

“It was an accident, George.”

Wilson shook his head. His eyes narrowed and his mouth widened
slightly with the ghost of a superior “Hm!”

“I know,” he said definitely. “I’m one of these trusting fellas and I
don’t think any harm to nobody, but when I get to know a thing I know
it. It was the man in that car. She ran out to speak to him and he
wouldn’t stop.”

Michaelis had seen this too, but it hadn’t occurred to him that there
was any special significance in it. He believed that Mrs. Wilson had
been running away from her husband, rather than trying to stop any
particular car.

“How could she of been like that?”

“She’s a deep one,” said Wilson, as if that answered the question.
“Ah-h-h—”

He began to rock again, and Michaelis stood twisting the leash in his
hand.

“Maybe you got some friend that I could telephone for, George?”

This was a forlorn hope—he was almost sure that Wilson had no friend:
there was not enough of him for his wife. He was glad a little later
when he noticed a change in the room, a blue quickening by the window,
and realized that dawn wasn’t far off. About five o’clock it was blue
enough outside to snap off the light.

Wilson’s glazed eyes turned out to the ash-heaps, where small grey
clouds took on fantastic shapes and scurried here and there in the
faint dawn wind.

“I spoke to her,” he muttered, after a long silence. “I told her she
might fool me but she couldn’t fool God. I took her to the
window”—with an effort he got up and walked to the rear window and
leaned with his face pressed against it—“and I said ‘God knows what
you’ve been doing, everything you’ve been doing. You may fool me, but
you can’t fool God!’ ”

Standing behind him, Michaelis saw with a shock that he was looking at
the eyes of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg, which had just emerged, pale and
enormous, from the dissolving night.

“God sees everything,” repeated Wilson.

“That’s an advertisement,” Michaelis assured him. Something made him
turn away from the window and look back into the room. But Wilson
stood there a long time, his face close to the window pane, nodding
into the twilight.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

By six o’clock Michaelis was worn out, and grateful for the sound of a
car stopping outside. It was one of the watchers of the night before
who had promised to come back, so he cooked breakfast for three, which
he and the other man ate together. Wilson was quieter now, and
Michaelis went home to sleep; when he awoke four hours later and
hurried back to the garage, Wilson was gone.

His movements—he was on foot all the time—were afterward traced to
Port Roosevelt and then to Gad’s Hill, where he bought a sandwich that
he didn’t eat, and a cup of coffee. He must have been tired and
walking slowly, for he didn’t reach Gad’s Hill until noon. Thus far
there was no difficulty in accounting for his time—there were boys who
had seen a man “acting sort of crazy,” and motorists at whom he stared
oddly from the side of the road. Then for three hours he disappeared
from view. The police, on the strength of what he said to Michaelis,
that he “had a way of finding out,” supposed that he spent that time
going from garage to garage thereabout, inquiring for a yellow car. On
the other hand, no garage man who had seen him ever came forward, and
perhaps he had an easier, surer way of finding out what he wanted to
know. By half-past two he was in West Egg, where he asked someone the
way to Gatsby’s house. So by that time he knew Gatsby’s name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

At two o’clock Gatsby put on his bathing-suit and left word with the
butler that if anyone phoned word was to be brought to him at the
pool. He stopped at the garage for a pneumatic mattress that had
amused his guests during the summer, and the chauffeur helped him to
pump it up. Then he gave instructions that the open car wasn’t to be
taken out under any circumstances—and this was strange, because the
front right fender needed repair.

Gatsby shouldered the mattress and started for the pool. Once he
stopped and shifted it a little, and the chauffeur asked him if he
needed help, but he shook his head and in a moment disappeared among
the yellowing trees.

No telephone message arrived, but the butler went without his sleep
and waited for it until four o’clock—until long after there was anyone
to give it to if it came. I have an idea that Gatsby himself didn’t
believe it would come, and perhaps he no longer cared. If that was
true he must have felt that he had lost the old warm world, paid a
high price for living too long with a single dream. He must have
looked up at an unfamiliar sky through frightening leaves and shivered
as he found what a grotesque thing a rose is and how raw the sunlight
was upon the scarcely created grass. A new world, material without
being real, where poor ghosts, breathing dreams like air, drifted
fortuitously about … like that ashen, fantastic figure gliding toward
him through the amorphous trees.

The chauffeur—he was one of Wolfshiem’s protégés—heard the
shots—afterwards he could only say that he hadn’t thought anything
much about them. I drove from the station directly to Gatsby’s house
and my rushing anxiously up the front steps was the first thing that
alarmed anyone. But they knew then, I firmly believe. With scarcely a
word said, four of us, the chauffeur, butler, gardener, and I hurried
down to the pool.

There was a faint, barely perceptible movement of the water as the
fresh flow from one end urged its way toward the drain at the other.
With little ripples that were hardly the shadows of waves, the laden
mattress moved irregularly down the pool. A small gust of wind that
scarcely corrugated the surface was enough to disturb its accidental
course with its accidental burden. The touch of a cluster of leaves
revolved it slowly, tracing, like the leg of transit, a thin red
circle in the water.

It was after we started with Gatsby toward the house that the gardener
saw Wilson’s body a little way off in the grass, and the holocaust was
complete.


                                  IX

After two years I remember the rest of that day, and that night and
the next day, only as an endless drill of police and photographers and
newspaper men in and out of Gatsby’s front door. A rope stretched
across the main gate and a policeman by it kept out the curious, but
little boys soon discovered that they could enter through my yard, and
there were always a few of them clustered open-mouthed about the
pool. Someone with a positive manner, perhaps a detective, used the
expression “madman” as he bent over Wilson’s body that afternoon, and
the adventitious authority of his voice set the key for the newspaper
reports next morning.

Most of those reports were a nightmare—grotesque, circumstantial,
eager, and untrue. When Michaelis’s testimony at the inquest brought
to light Wilson’s suspicions of his wife I thought the whole tale
would shortly be served up in racy pasquinade—but Catherine, who might
have said anything, didn’t say a word. She showed a surprising amount
of character about it too—looked at the coroner with determined eyes
under that corrected brow of hers, and swore that her sister had never
seen Gatsby, that her sister was completely happy with her husband,
that her sister had been into no mischief whatever. She convinced
herself of it, and cried into her handkerchief, as if the very
suggestion was more than she could endure. So Wilson was reduced to a
man “deranged by grief” in order that the case might remain in its
simplest form. And it rested there.

But all this part of it seemed remote and unessential. I found myself
on Gatsby’s side, and alone. From the moment I telephoned news of the
catastrophe to West Egg village, every surmise about him, and every
practical question, was referred to me. At first I was surprised and
confused; then, as he lay in his house and didn’t move or breathe or
speak, hour upon hour, it grew upon me that I was responsible, because
no one else was interested—interested, I mean, with that intense
personal interest to which everyone has some vague right at the end.

I called up Daisy half an hour after we found him, called her
instinctively and without hesitation. But she and Tom had gone away
early that afternoon, and taken baggage with them.

“Left no address?”

“No.”

“Say when they’d be back?”

“No.”

“Any idea where they are? How I could reach them?”

“I don’t know. Can’t say.”

I wanted to get somebody for him. I wanted to go into the room where
he lay and reassure him: “I’ll get somebody for you, Gatsby. Don’t
worry. Just trust me and I’ll get somebody for you—”

Meyer Wolfshiem’s name wasn’t in the phone book. The butler gave me
his office address on Broadway, and I called Information, but by the
time I had the number it was long after five, and no one answered the
phone.

“Will you ring again?”

“I’ve rung three times.”

“It’s very important.”

“Sorry. I’m afraid no one’s there.”

I went back to the drawing-room and thought for an instant that they
were chance visitors, all these official people who suddenly filled
it. But, though they drew back the sheet and looked at Gatsby with
shocked eyes, his protest continued in my brain:

“Look here, old sport, you’ve got to get somebody for me. You’ve got
to try hard. I can’t go through this alone.”

Someone started to ask me questions, but I broke away and going
upstairs looked hastily through the unlocked parts of his desk—he’d
never told me definitely that his parents were dead. But there was
nothing—only the picture of Dan Cody, a token of forgotten violence,
staring down from the wall.

Next morning I sent the butler to New York with a letter to Wolfshiem,
which asked for information and urged him to come out on the next
train. That request seemed superfluous when I wrote it. I was sure
he’d start when he saw the newspapers, just as I was sure there’d be a
wire from Daisy before noon—but neither a wire nor Mr. Wolfshiem
arrived; no one arrived except more police and photographers and
newspaper men. When the butler brought back Wolfshiem’s answer I began
to have a feeling of defiance, of scornful solidarity between Gatsby
and me against them all.

 Dear Mr. Carraway. This has been one of the most terrible shocks of
 my life to me I hardly can believe it that it is true at all. Such a
 mad act as that man did should make us all think. I cannot come down
 now as I am tied up in some very important business and cannot get
 mixed up in this thing now. If there is anything I can do a little
 later let me know in a letter by Edgar. I hardly know where I am when
 I hear about a thing like this and am completely knocked down and
 out.

                               Yours truly

                             Meyer Wolfshiem

and then hasty addenda beneath:

 Let me know about the funeral etc do not know his family at all.

When the phone rang that afternoon and Long Distance said Chicago was
calling I thought this would be Daisy at last. But the connection came
through as a man’s voice, very thin and far away.

“This is Slagle speaking …”

“Yes?” The name was unfamiliar.

“Hell of a note, isn’t it? Get my wire?”

“There haven’t been any wires.”

“Young Parke’s in trouble,” he said rapidly. “They picked him up when
he handed the bonds over the counter. They got a circular from New
York giving ’em the numbers just five minutes before. What d’you know
about that, hey? You never can tell in these hick towns—”

“Hello!” I interrupted breathlessly. “Look here—this isn’t Mr.
Gatsby. Mr. Gatsby’s dead.”

There was a long silence on the other end of the wire, followed by an
exclamation … then a quick squawk as the connection was broken.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I think it was on the third day that a telegram signed Henry C. Gatz
arrived from a town in Minnesota. It said only that the sender was
leaving immediately and to postpone the funeral until he came.

It was Gatsby’s father, a solemn old man, very helpless and dismayed,
bundled up in a long cheap ulster against the warm September day. His
eyes leaked continuously with excitement, and when I took the bag and
umbrella from his hands he began to pull so incessantly at his sparse
grey beard that I had difficulty in getting off his coat. He was on
the point of collapse, so I took him into the music-room and made him
sit down while I sent for something to eat. But he wouldn’t eat, and
the glass of milk spilled from his trembling hand.

“I saw it in the Chicago newspaper,” he said. “It was all in the
Chicago newspaper. I started right away.”

“I didn’t know how to reach you.”

His eyes, seeing nothing, moved ceaselessly about the room.

“It was a madman,” he said. “He must have been mad.”

“Wouldn’t you like some coffee?” I urged him.

“I don’t want anything. I’m all right now, Mr.—”

“Carraway.”

“Well, I’m all right now. Where have they got Jimmy?”

I took him into the drawing-room, where his son lay, and left him
there. Some little boys had come up on the steps and were looking into
the hall; when I told them who had arrived, they went reluctantly
away.

After a little while Mr. Gatz opened the door and came out, his mouth
ajar, his face flushed slightly, his eyes leaking isolated and
unpunctual tears. He had reached an age where death no longer has the
quality of ghastly surprise, and when he looked around him now for the
first time and saw the height and splendour of the hall and the great
rooms opening out from it into other rooms, his grief began to be
mixed with an awed pride. I helped him to a bedroom upstairs; while he
took off his coat and vest I told him that all arrangements had been
deferred until he came.

“I didn’t know what you’d want, Mr. Gatsby—”

“Gatz is my name.”

“—Mr. Gatz. I thought you might want to take the body West.”

He shook his head.

“Jimmy always liked it better down East. He rose up to his position in
the East. Were you a friend of my boy’s, Mr.—?”

“We were close friends.”

“He had a big future before him, you know. He was only a young man,
but he had a lot of brain power here.”

He touched his head impressively, and I nodded.

“If he’d of lived, he’d of been a great man. A man like James J.
Hill. He’d of helped build up the country.”

“That’s true,” I said, uncomfortably.

He fumbled at the embroidered coverlet, trying to take it from the
bed, and lay down stiffly—was instantly asleep.

That night an obviously frightened person called up, and demanded to
know who I was before he would give his name.

“This is Mr. Carraway,” I said.

“Oh!” He sounded relieved. “This is Klipspringer.”

I was relieved too, for that seemed to promise another friend at
Gatsby’s grave. I didn’t want it to be in the papers and draw a
sightseeing crowd, so I’d been calling up a few people myself. They
were hard to find.

“The funeral’s tomorrow,” I said. “Three o’clock, here at the house.
I wish you’d tell anybody who’d be interested.”

“Oh, I will,” he broke out hastily. “Of course I’m not likely to see
anybody, but if I do.”

His tone made me suspicious.

“Of course you’ll be there yourself.”

“Well, I’ll certainly try. What I called up about is—”

“Wait a minute,” I interrupted. “How about saying you’ll come?”

“Well, the fact is—the truth of the matter is that I’m staying with
some people up here in Greenwich, and they rather expect me to be with
them tomorrow. In fact, there’s a sort of picnic or something. Of
course I’ll do my best to get away.”

I ejaculated an unrestrained “Huh!” and he must have heard me, for he
went on nervously:

“What I called up about was a pair of shoes I left there. I wonder if
it’d be too much trouble to have the butler send them on. You see,
they’re tennis shoes, and I’m sort of helpless without them. My
address is care of B. F.—”

I didn’t hear the rest of the name, because I hung up the receiver.

After that I felt a certain shame for Gatsby—one gentleman to whom I
telephoned implied that he had got what he deserved. However, that was
my fault, for he was one of those who used to sneer most bitterly at
Gatsby on the courage of Gatsby’s liquor, and I should have known
better than to call him.

The morning of the funeral I went up to New York to see Meyer
Wolfshiem; I couldn’t seem to reach him any other way. The door that I
pushed open, on the advice of an elevator boy, was marked “The
Swastika Holding Company,” and at first there didn’t seem to be anyone
inside. But when I’d shouted “hello” several times in vain, an
argument broke out behind a partition, and presently a lovely Jewess
appeared at an interior door and scrutinized me with black hostile
eyes.

“Nobody’s in,” she said. “Mr. Wolfshiem’s gone to Chicago.”

The first part of this was obviously untrue, for someone had begun to
whistle “The Rosary,” tunelessly, inside.

“Please say that Mr. Carraway wants to see him.”

“I can’t get him back from Chicago, can I?”

At this moment a voice, unmistakably Wolfshiem’s, called “Stella!”
from the other side of the door.

“Leave your name on the desk,” she said quickly. “I’ll give it to him
when he gets back.”

“But I know he’s there.”

She took a step toward me and began to slide her hands indignantly up
and down her hips.

“You young men think you can force your way in here any time,” she
scolded. “We’re getting sickantired of it. When I say he’s in Chicago,
he’s in Chicago.”

I mentioned Gatsby.

“Oh-h!” She looked at me over again. “Will you just—What was your
name?”

She vanished. In a moment Meyer Wolfshiem stood solemnly in the
doorway, holding out both hands. He drew me into his office, remarking
in a reverent voice that it was a sad time for all of us, and offered
me a cigar.

“My memory goes back to when first I met him,” he said. “A young major
just out of the army and covered over with medals he got in the war.
He was so hard up he had to keep on wearing his uniform because he
couldn’t buy some regular clothes. First time I saw him was when he
came into Winebrenner’s poolroom at Forty-third Street and asked for a
job. He hadn’t eat anything for a couple of days. ‘Come on have some
lunch with me,’ I said. He ate more than four dollars’ worth of food
in half an hour.”

“Did you start him in business?” I inquired.

“Start him! I made him.”

“Oh.”

“I raised him up out of nothing, right out of the gutter. I saw right
away he was a fine-appearing, gentlemanly young man, and when he told
me he was at Oggsford I knew I could use him good. I got him to join
the American Legion and he used to stand high there. Right off he did
some work for a client of mine up to Albany. We were so thick like
that in everything”—he held up two bulbous fingers—“always together.”

I wondered if this partnership had included the World’s Series
transaction in 1919.

“Now he’s dead,” I said after a moment. “You were his closest friend,
so I know you’ll want to come to his funeral this afternoon.”

“I’d like to come.”

“Well, come then.”

The hair in his nostrils quivered slightly, and as he shook his head
his eyes filled with tears.

“I can’t do it—I can’t get mixed up in it,” he said.

“There’s nothing to get mixed up in. It’s all over now.”

“When a man gets killed I never like to get mixed up in it in any
way. I keep out. When I was a young man it was different—if a friend
of mine died, no matter how, I stuck with them to the end. You may
think that’s sentimental, but I mean it—to the bitter end.”

I saw that for some reason of his own he was determined not to come,
so I stood up.

“Are you a college man?” he inquired suddenly.

For a moment I thought he was going to suggest a “gonnegtion,” but he
only nodded and shook my hand.

“Let us learn to show our friendship for a man when he is alive and
not after he is dead,” he suggested. “After that my own rule is to let
everything alone.”

When I left his office the sky had turned dark and I got back to West
Egg in a drizzle. After changing my clothes I went next door and found
Mr. Gatz walking up and down excitedly in the hall. His pride in his
son and in his son’s possessions was continually increasing and now he
had something to show me.

“Jimmy sent me this picture.” He took out his wallet with trembling
fingers. “Look there.”

It was a photograph of the house, cracked in the corners and dirty
with many hands. He pointed out every detail to me eagerly. “Look
there!” and then sought admiration from my eyes. He had shown it so
often that I think it was more real to him now than the house itself.

“Jimmy sent it to me. I think it’s a very pretty picture. It shows up
well.”

“Very well. Had you seen him lately?”

“He come out to see me two years ago and bought me the house I live in
now. Of course we was broke up when he run off from home, but I see
now there was a reason for it. He knew he had a big future in front of
him. And ever since he made a success he was very generous with me.”

He seemed reluctant to put away the picture, held it for another
minute, lingeringly, before my eyes. Then he returned the wallet and
pulled from his pocket a ragged old copy of a book called Hopalong
Cassidy.

“Look here, this is a book he had when he was a boy. It just shows
you.”

He opened it at the back cover and turned it around for me to see. On
the last flyleaf was printed the word schedule, and the date September
12, 1906. And underneath:

    Rise from bed                                  6:00      a.m.
    Dumbell exercise and wall-scaling              6:15-6:30 ”
    Study electricity, etc.                        7:15-8:15 ”
    Work                                           8:30-4:30 p.m.
    Baseball and sports                            4:30-5:00 ”
    Practise elocution, poise and how to attain it 5:00-6:00 ”
    Study needed inventions                        7:00-9:00 ”

               General Resolves

  * No wasting time at Shafters or [a name, indecipherable]

  * No more smokeing or chewing.

  * Bath every other day

  * Read one improving book or magazine per week

  * Save $5.00 [crossed out] $3.00 per week

  * Be better to parents

“I came across this book by accident,” said the old man. “It just
shows you, don’t it?”

“It just shows you.”

“Jimmy was bound to get ahead. He always had some resolves like this
or something. Do you notice what he’s got about improving his mind? He
was always great for that. He told me I et like a hog once, and I beat
him for it.”

He was reluctant to close the book, reading each item aloud and then
looking eagerly at me. I think he rather expected me to copy down the
list for my own use.

A little before three the Lutheran minister arrived from Flushing, and
I began to look involuntarily out the windows for other cars. So did
Gatsby’s father. And as the time passed and the servants came in and
stood waiting in the hall, his eyes began to blink anxiously, and he
spoke of the rain in a worried, uncertain way. The minister glanced
several times at his watch, so I took him aside and asked him to wait
for half an hour. But it wasn’t any use. Nobody came.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

About five o’clock our procession of three cars reached the cemetery
and stopped in a thick drizzle beside the gate—first a motor hearse,
horribly black and wet, then Mr. Gatz and the minister and me in the
limousine, and a little later four or five servants and the postman
from West Egg, in Gatsby’s station wagon, all wet to the skin. As we
started through the gate into the cemetery I heard a car stop and then
the sound of someone splashing after us over the soggy ground. I
looked around. It was the man with owl-eyed glasses whom I had found
marvelling over Gatsby’s books in the library one night three months
before.

I’d never seen him since then. I don’t know how he knew about the
funeral, or even his name. The rain poured down his thick glasses, and
he took them off and wiped them to see the protecting canvas unrolled
from Gatsby’s grave.

I tried to think about Gatsby then for a moment, but he was already
too far away, and I could only remember, without resentment, that
Daisy hadn’t sent a message or a flower. Dimly I heard someone murmur
“Blessed are the dead that the rain falls on,” and then the owl-eyed
man said “Amen to that,” in a brave voice.

We straggled down quickly through the rain to the cars. Owl-eyes spoke
to me by the gate.

“I couldn’t get to the house,” he remarked.

“Neither could anybody else.”

“Go on!” He started. “Why, my God! they used to go there by the
hundreds.”

He took off his glasses and wiped them again, outside and in.

“The poor son-of-a-bitch,” he said.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

One of my most vivid memories is of coming back West from prep school
and later from college at Christmas time. Those who went farther than
Chicago would gather in the old dim Union Station at six o’clock of a
December evening, with a few Chicago friends, already caught up into
their own holiday gaieties, to bid them a hasty goodbye. I remember
the fur coats of the girls returning from Miss This-or-That’s and the
chatter of frozen breath and the hands waving overhead as we caught
sight of old acquaintances, and the matchings of invitations: “Are you
going to the Ordways’? the Herseys’? the Schultzes’?” and the long
green tickets clasped tight in our gloved hands. And last the murky
yellow cars of the Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul railroad looking
cheerful as Christmas itself on the tracks beside the gate.

When we pulled out into the winter night and the real snow, our snow,
began to stretch out beside us and twinkle against the windows, and
the dim lights of small Wisconsin stations moved by, a sharp wild
brace came suddenly into the air. We drew in deep breaths of it as we
walked back from dinner through the cold vestibules, unutterably aware
of our identity with this country for one strange hour, before we
melted indistinguishably into it again.

That’s my Middle West—not the wheat or the prairies or the lost Swede
towns, but the thrilling returning trains of my youth, and the street
lamps and sleigh bells in the frosty dark and the shadows of holly
wreaths thrown by lighted windows on the snow. I am part of that, a
little solemn with the feel of those long winters, a little complacent
from growing up in the Carraway house in a city where dwellings are
still called through decades by a family’s name. I see now that this
has been a story of the West, after all—Tom and Gatsby, Daisy and
Jordan and I, were all Westerners, and perhaps we possessed some
deficiency in common which made us subtly unadaptable to Eastern life.

Even when the East excited me most, even when I was most keenly aware
of its superiority to the bored, sprawling, swollen towns beyond the
Ohio, with their interminable inquisitions which spared only the
children and the very old—even then it had always for me a quality of
distortion. West Egg, especially, still figures in my more fantastic
dreams. I see it as a night scene by El Greco: a hundred houses, at
once conventional and grotesque, crouching under a sullen, overhanging
sky and a lustreless moon. In the foreground four solemn men in dress
suits are walking along the sidewalk with a stretcher on which lies a
drunken woman in a white evening dress. Her hand, which dangles over
the side, sparkles cold with jewels. Gravely the men turn in at a
house—the wrong house. But no one knows the woman’s name, and no one
cares.

After Gatsby’s death the East was haunted for me like that, distorted
beyond my eyes’ power of correction. So when the blue smoke of brittle
leaves was in the air and the wind blew the wet laundry stiff on the
line I decided to come back home.

There was one thing to be done before I left, an awkward, unpleasant
thing that perhaps had better have been let alone. But I wanted to
leave things in order and not just trust that obliging and indifferent
sea to sweep my refuse away. I saw Jordan Baker and talked over and
around what had happened to us together, and what had happened
afterward to me, and she lay perfectly still, listening, in a big
chair.

She was dressed to play golf, and I remember thinking she looked like
a good illustration, her chin raised a little jauntily, her hair the
colour of an autumn leaf, her face the same brown tint as the
fingerless glove on her knee. When I had finished she told me without
comment that she was engaged to another man. I doubted that, though
there were several she could have married at a nod of her head, but I
pretended to be surprised. For just a minute I wondered if I wasn’t
making a mistake, then I thought it all over again quickly and got up
to say goodbye.

“Nevertheless you did throw me over,” said Jordan suddenly. “You threw
me over on the telephone. I don’t give a damn about you now, but it
was a new experience for me, and I felt a little dizzy for a while.”

We shook hands.

“Oh, and do you remember”—she added—“a conversation we had once about
driving a car?”

“Why—not exactly.”

“You said a bad driver was only safe until she met another bad driver?
Well, I met another bad driver, didn’t I? I mean it was careless of me
to make such a wrong guess. I thought you were rather an honest,
straightforward person. I thought it was your secret pride.”

“I’m thirty,” I said. “I’m five years too old to lie to myself and
call it honour.”

She didn’t answer. Angry, and half in love with her, and tremendously
sorry, I turned away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

One afternoon late in October I saw Tom Buchanan. He was walking ahead
of me along Fifth Avenue in his alert, aggressive way, his hands out a
little from his body as if to fight off interference, his head moving
sharply here and there, adapting itself to his restless eyes. Just as
I slowed up to avoid overtaking him he stopped and began frowning into
the windows of a jewellery store. Suddenly he saw me and walked back,
holding out his hand.

“What’s the matter, Nick? Do you object to shaking hands with me?”

“Yes. You know what I think of you.”

“You’re crazy, Nick,” he said quickly. “Crazy as hell. I don’t know
what’s the matter with you.”

“Tom,” I inquired, “what did you say to Wilson that afternoon?”

He stared at me without a word, and I knew I had guessed right about
those missing hours. I started to turn away, but he took a step after
me and grabbed my arm.

“I told him the truth,” he said. “He came to the door while we were
getting ready to leave, and when I sent down word that we weren’t in
he tried to force his way upstairs. He was crazy enough to kill me if
I hadn’t told him who owned the car. His hand was on a revolver in his
pocket every minute he was in the house—” He broke off defiantly.
“What if I did tell him? That fellow had it coming to him. He threw
dust into your eyes just like he did in Daisy’s, but he was a tough
one. He ran over Myrtle like you’d run over a dog and never even
stopped his car.”

There was nothing I could say, except the one unutterable fact that it
wasn’t true.

“And if you think I didn’t have my share of suffering—look here, when
I went to give up that flat and saw that damn box of dog biscuits
sitting there on the sideboard, I sat down and cried like a baby. By
God it was awful—”

I couldn’t forgive him or like him, but I saw that what he had done
was, to him, entirely justified. It was all very careless and
confused. They were careless people, Tom and Daisy—they smashed up
things and creatures and then retreated back into their money or their
vast carelessness, or whatever it was that kept them together, and let
other people clean up the mess they had made …

I shook hands with him; it seemed silly not to, for I felt suddenly as
though I were talking to a child. Then he went into the jewellery
store to buy a pearl necklace—or perhaps only a pair of cuff
buttons—rid of my provincial squeamishness forever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Gatsby’s house was still empty when I left—the grass on his lawn had
grown as long as mine. One of the taxi drivers in the village never
took a fare past the entrance gate without stopping for a minute and
pointing inside; perhaps it was he who drove Daisy and Gatsby over to
East Egg the night of the accident, and perhaps he had made a story
about it all his own. I didn’t want to hear it and I avoided him when
I got off the train.

I spent my Saturday nights in New York because those gleaming,
dazzling parties of his were with me so vividly that I could still
hear the music and the laughter, faint and incessant, from his garden,
and the cars going up and down his drive. One night I did hear a
material car there, and saw its lights stop at his front steps. But I
didn’t investigate. Probably it was some final guest who had been away
at the ends of the earth and didn’t know that the party was over.

On the last night, with my trunk packed and my car sold to the grocer,
I went over and looked at that huge incoherent failure of a house once
more. On the white steps an obscene word, scrawled by some boy with a
piece of brick, stood out clearly in the moonlight, and I erased it,
drawing my shoe raspingly along the stone. Then I wandered down to the
beach and sprawled out on the sand.

Most of the big shore places were closed now and there were hardly any
lights except the shadowy, moving glow of a ferryboat across the
Sound. And as the moon rose higher the inessential houses began to
melt away until gradually I became aware of the old island here that
flowered once for Dutch sailors’ eyes—a fresh, green breast of the new
world. Its vanished trees, the trees that had made way for Gatsby’s
house, had once pandered in whispers to the last and greatest of all
human dreams; for a transitory enchanted moment man must have held his
breath in the presence of this continent, compelled into an aesthetic
contemplation he neither understood nor desired, face to face for the
last time in history with something commensurate to his capacity for
wonder.

And as I sat there brooding on the old, unknown world, I thought of
Gatsby’s wonder when he first picked out the green light at the end of
Daisy’s dock. He had come a long way to this blue lawn, and his dream
must have seemed so close that he could hardly fail to grasp it. He
did not know that it was already behind him, somewhere back in that
vast obscurity beyond the city, where the dark fields of the republic
rolled on under the night.

Gatsby believed in the green light, the orgastic future that year by
year recedes before us. It eluded us then, but that’s no
matter—tomorrow we will run faster, stretch out our arms further … And
one fine morning—

So we beat on, boats against the current, borne back ceaselessly into
the past.


                           ISMAEL A. AMADO

                          BULALAKAW ÑG PAG-ASA

                          Mga Pañgunang Talata

                                   Ni

                           Iñigo Ed. Regalado





                          Bulalakaw ng Pág-Asa

                               Sinulat ni
                            Ismael A. Amado

            noong mga unang araw ng kanyang pagkabinata nang
           ang kanyang gulang ay lalabing walong taón lamang.

                         Mga Paunang Talata ni
                           Iñigo Ed. Regalado







MGA PAUNANG TALATA


Giliw na Mangbabasa:

Kung sa pagtunghay mo ng mga akdang paris nitó ay wala kang ibáng
nais kungdi libañgín ang iyóng kalulwa sa mga pangyayaring tinatawid
ng dalawáng pusong nag-iibigan; dalhin ang panimdim sa silíd na
pinaglalaguyuan ng mga kalulwang pinagtali ng pag-ibig; mabatíd ang
mga hiwaga ng pagmamahalan ng magkasi na karaniwang ibinubuhay ng
ating mga mañgañgatha; kung iyán lamang ang iyong hañgád, ay huwag
ka nang magpatuloy ng pagbuklat sa mga dahon ng kathang itó, pagka't
pananaktan ka lamang ng ulo at maaaksayahan ng panahón: ang aklat
na itó'y hindi makatutugon sa iyóng pita. Itó'y bulaklak na waláng
bañgó, ñguni't bulaklak. Itó'y parang lañgit na walang buwan ni tala,
ni mga bítuing nakaaaliw sa naninimdim na puso; ñguni't may araw na
nakapapaso't nakasusunog sa maninipis na balát.

Datapuwa't kung ang layon mo'y dumamá ng isáng sugat na dinamdam
ng ating bayan; humanap ng isáng buháy na adhika upang pag-arala't
dilidilihin; mag-aral ng mga makabayang halimbawa upang ituro sa
ibá alang-alang sa kapakanán ng ating Lahi; kung iyán ang iyóng
pita ay buklatín mong isa-isa ang mga dahon ng kasaysayang itó,
matiyaga mong tunghan ang kaniyang talata, pagka't titibók ang iyong
puso at mabubuhay na lalu't lalo ang mga símulaing inaalagaan mo sa
dibdib. Ito'y sigáng nagdiriñgas ñguni't hindi nakatutupok. Ito'y súnog
na naglalagablab; ñguni't waláng mga alipatong sukat pañganibang
makapagpapalakí ng apoy. Wala: ang layon ng sumulat ay bumuu,
hindi gumiba.

Sa pamamagitan ng mga paunang talatang itó ay sukat nang mahinuha
ng sinomán ang nilalaman ng Bulalakaw ng Pag-asa: Pag-asa sa isang
Bayang matibay na mapapatayo at hindi sa isang Pag-ibig na balót ng
mga pagpapakunwari. Ito'y pañgarap; ñguni't yao'y katotohanan.

Gayon man, ang pagkakalabas ñgayon ng aklat na itó ay nañgañgailañgan
ng isang paliwanag. Palibhasa'y akó--marahil--ang unang sumaksi sa
pagkakasulat ng mga unang dahon nitó, kaya siyang napitang tumungkol
ng kailañgang pagpapaaninaw kung anó't ang isáng akdang limbag na
noon pang Agosto ng 1909 ay ñgayon lamang natuluyang palabasín at
ipagbibilí sa mga aklatan.

Ang Bulalakaw ng Pag-asa ay natapos sa limbagan noon pa ñgang
1909. Inaaklat na lamang ang kaniyang mga salin nang ang kumatha'y
tumanggap ng mahihigpit na payo buhat sa maraming "nakatataas" sa
kaniya, at kung bagá sa isáng sumisintang ibig mag-asawa, ang nangyari
sa kumatha'y natira sa pananabik, pagka't nang dumulóg sa magkakasal,
ito'y nagkaít ng tulong at iminatuwid na bukód sa "menor de edad" ay
wala pang "konsentimiento" ang mga magulang. Ang kasál ay naurong. O sa
lalong maliwanag: ang aklat ay hindi lumabas. Pinigil ang pagpapalabas.

Bakit?

Ang sabi ng nañgagpayo: masama ang panahon, sa papawiri'y
naglipád-lipad ang mga ibong mangdaragit ... ang mga sisiw ay
kailañgang mañgagtago upang huwag mapahamak. Nang mga araw na
yao'y sariwang-sariwa pa ang usapín ng "Muling Pagsilang", at
pinag-aalinlañganan ng marami ang katibayan ng malayang paglalathala
ng anománg babasahin, magíng ito'y aklat o pahayagan kaya. At ... sa
pakikibagay sa panahon--hindi sa takot--ang kumatha nitó'y dinaíg
ng makatuwirang payo at ang kaniyang aklat ay malaong natulog sa
"isang madilím na silid".

Buhat noon, ang pañgalan ng kumatha, na, nang mga araw na
sinabi'y hinañgaan ng Bayang Tagalog dahil sa matatapang niyang
lathalang lumalabas sa mga pahayagan, ay naligpit na rin at di na
napagdiníg. ¿Saan naroon si Ismael A. Amado? ¿Saan naroon ang batang
manunulat na tubo sa San Mateo? Kasalukuyang hinahanap ng sumusulat
nitó ang katugunan sa mga tanóng na iyan, nang walang anú-anó'y sa
sisipót at inilalahad sa akin ang kaniyang palad.

--Isang mahigpit na kamáy at yakap, kaibigan--ang wika niya sa
akin;--akó'y maglalayág na patuñgo sa Amerika.

--At ang Bulalakaw ng Pag-asa?--ang pamangha kong tanong.

--Aywan ko kung saan naparoon, at aywan ko rin kung ano ang kaniyang
kahihinatnan. Marahil ay sinunog na nilá.

Nakaraan ang mga buwan at taón. At... patí na akong isá sa
matatalik na kaibigan ng naglalayag ay hindi tumanggap ng kahi't
anóng balita. Parang namatáy sa larañgan ng Panitikang Tagalog ang
pañgalang Ismael A. Amado!

Walang anú-anó, pagkaraan ng ilang taón, ay napabalitang ang manunulat
na tagá San Mateo ay dumating, matapos makapag-aral sa Amerika. Sa
una naming pagkikita'y wala kamíng napag-usapan kungdi ang kaniyang
"nakatulog" na Bulalakaw... Ang kaibigan ko'y napañgiti lamang at
nagpahayag ng ganito:

--Ang Bulalakaw ng Pag-asa ay dinatnan ko pa sa aking silíd, naroong
nagtalaksan; ñguni't marahil ipasusunog ko na. Kay sama ng pagkakasulat
at akóng itó ang una-unang nakakakilala ñgayon ng kasamaan, hindi
lamang ng pagkakasulat, kungdi lalu't higít ng iláng isipang doo'y
aking inilarawan.

¡Sayang na aklat!

Gayón man, salamat sa pagpapayo ng maraming kamanunulat sa wikang
tagalog, at si Amado'y napilitang sumunod sa kanilang adhika.

--Natalo akó kaibigan,--ang wika sa akin.--Ang Bulalakaw ng Pag-asa
ay tila ipaaaklat ko rin; ñguni't hindi na upang masunod ang una
kong hañgarin, kungdi upang makatulong na lamang sa pagpapayaman ng
mga aklat na nasusulat sa ating sariling wika. Dapat mong mabatíd na
akó ang una-unang kumikilala na ang aklat na iyá'y hindi nababagay sa
panahong itó ng pagtutuluñgán at mabuting pagsasama ng sinasakop at
nakasasakop. Ang paglalathala ko nitó'y buñga na lamang ng aking nais
na magkaroon ng kahi't isáng aklat na magpapaalala ng mga nangyari ng
panahong nakapaiibabaw rito ang katuwiran ng lakás at di ang lakás
ng katuwiran. Alaala sa panahong iyan, at wala... Iyán lamang ang
nagbunsod sa akin upang ipaaklat ang maralita kong Bulalakaw.

At narito't pinaaklat ñga at ñgayo'y buong pusong inihahandóg sa mga
giliw na mangbabasa.

Gaya nang nasabi na sa dakong unahan nito, ang Bulalakaw ng Pag-asa
ay limbag na noon pang Agosto ng 1909. Mula noon hangga ñgayon ay
mahigit nang siyam na taón ang nakararaan. Kung ang naturang aklat ay
isá lamang buñgang kahoy, nanatili man ang magandang kulay, marahil
ay tuyo na't walang katas. Sukat ng makuro ng mga mangbabasa na
ang aklat na ito, dahil sa ganiyang pangyayari, ay wala ng katas na
pangkasalukuyan. Gayon man, palibhasa'y buháy ang mga pangyayaring
tinutukoy sa aklat, ito'y maaaring pakinabañgan ng sinomang may
ibig makinabang.

¿May katañgian ang aklat na ito? Sa ganang akin ay mayroon, ñguni't
wala. Datapuwa't may isang dakilang katañgian: nakahambing siya ni
Kristong umano'y nabuhay na muli, matapos malibing sa hukay.

¿Marami kayang kamalian? Sa ganang akin, ay marami rin; ñguni't
wala. Marami, sapagka't talagang marami. At wala, sapagka't ang
kumatha na rin ang una-unang nagsasabing napakasama ng pagkakayari
sa aklat na ito.

Nguni't sinabi ko na: kailañgang isaalang-alang natin ang pangyayaring
ang aklat na ito'y sinulat ng kumatha noong bago siya magtuñgo sa
Estados Unidos at kaya lamang niya pinalabas ñgayon ay sapagka't
siya'y napilitan.

Gaya nang nasasabí na sa dakong unahan nito, ang layon ng sumulat
sa aklat na itó'y dakila sa lalong dakila: itanim sa puso ng lahat
ng Pilipino ang pag-ibig sa Tinubuang Lupa. Lamang ay mapapansing
ang sumulat, ay wala sa kanyang sarili nang ito'y sulatin. Manapa'y
pinapagsasalita siya ni Rizal, minsa'y sa pamamagítan ni Elias
sa "Noli Me Tángere" at kadalasa'y sa pamamagitan ni Simoun sa
"Filibusterismo". Ang wika niya: "... kinakailañgang mátanim sa puso
at mabatid ng bawa't Pilipino, na ang una at hulíng tungkulin niya sa
iyo (sa Bayan) ay ang matutong gumiba, gumutay, tumupok, nang walang
kapañgipañgimi, sa dapat igiba, gutayin at tupukin". Nguni't ang
kumatha'y may katwiran. ¿Ano't hindi iukilkil tuwi na ang makabuluhang
aral ni Rizal, hinggil sa Bayan at sa Lahi?

Ang mga giliw na mangbabasa'y hindi naman dapat mag-isip na ang kathang
ito'y nakakatang sa mga pag-iisip ni Rizal. Ni hindi maituturing
na hañgo. Ni plahio! Ni ano pa man! Kung baga sa paghahasik, ang
mga isipang naririya'y tinipon ng ating Bayani sa isang sisidlán at
isinasabog namán ni Amado, hindi upang aksayahin, kungdi upang itanim
at nang tumubo, mamulaklák at mamuñga.

May isang mañgañgathang nakabasa na nitong Bulalakaw ng Pag-asa na sa
aki'y nagpahiwatig na karamihan pang mga isipan ng kumatha ay hañgo sa
ilang isipan ni Rizal, tungkol sa Bayan natin. Ako'y hindi naniniwala
sa bagay na itó, pagka't kung magkakaganyan ay matitiyák nating ang
Busabos ng Palad ni Aguilar ay plahio sa Resurrección ni Tolstoy,
itó nama'y plahio rin sa La Dama de las Camelias ni Dumas ... At,
itó namán, ang Dama de las Camelias, na isang kathang nagtamó ng
papuri sa sangdaigdig ay isang plahio lamang sa isang dramang hapón
na pinamagatang Kami Ya-Giyé. Ang "argumento" ng mga kathang iyan
na aking binanggit ay halos nañgagkakaisa: si Celso ni Rita ay siya
ring si Neclindeff ni Maslova sa Resurrección; ñguni't si Neclindeff
ni Maslova ay siya ring si Armando ni Margarita sa La Dama de las
Camelias; datapwa't ang Armandong itó ay siya ri't di iba ang Giyé
ni O'Hare sa dramang hapóng Kami Ya-Giyé, na, unang di hamak sa La
Dama; ñguni't kailan ma'y walang nañgahas na magsabing ang walang
kamatayang kathang iyán ni Alejandro Dumas (anák) ay plahio lamang
sa isang dramang hapón.

Ang totoo, sa ganang akin, sa apat na panulukan ng Sandaigdig, ay
di nawawalán ng dalawa kataong nagkakaisa ng isipan sa iisang araw
at oras.  Ang mga isipan ni Amado ay may sariling uri at taták,
kay sa mga pañguñgusap ni Rizal sa mga labi ni Elias at ni Simoun.

Sa anu't anó man, ang aklat ay narito't yari na. Sa pañgalan kong
sarili'y buong pitagang inihahandog sa mga giliw na mangbabasa at
sila na ang bahalang humatol.

Opo, hatulan ninyo ang aklat na itong kinalalarawan ng isang pusong
pinag-aalaban ng pag-ibig sa Tinubuang Lupa, ng isang dibdib na
pinatitibok ng dalisay na pagsinta sa Lahi, ng isang kaluluwang
pinadadakila ng adhikang mapatayo ang isang Bayan matibay at malinis,
sa ibabaw ng mga labi ng isang Bayang bulók at pinaghaharían ng
mga kasamaan.


Iñigo Ed. Regalado,
Tagapamatnugot ng Ang Mithi.







BULALÁKAW NG PAG-ÁSA

I

MGA DUWÁG!!...


--"Ako'y makapangyaríhan dito.

"Ang báyang itó ay akin.

"Ang mga báhay na iyan ay akin.

"Ang mga búkid at bundók na iyón ay akin din.

"Ang mga táong iyán ay nanúnulúyan laang dito. Walâ siláng báyan. Ang
báyan nila'y binilí ng aking báyan.... Silá ang mga talúnang gúgu, ang
mga di dápat lumayà at magsarilí, sapagka't walang káya, sapagka't mga
mangmáng, mga incivilizado, mga tamád, at sapagka't kapag pinalayá,
silá at hindî kami ang mabubusóg sa mga búkid at bundók na iyan na
bawa't kimpál ng kanilang lupa ay isang kimpal na gintô!"

Humigit kumúlang ay ganitó ang wari baga'y ibig ipahiwatig ng lákad,
dagunot ng paa, imbáy, galáw ng mga nagluluwángang matá, at anyô ng
mukhâ ng isang anaki'y leon na nagkatawáng tao; isa manding Nicholás
II; isang tila baga matáas na matáas na di marunong yumukô, ó di
nakakakilála sa alin mang punô.

Ang máginoong ito ay isa riyan sa mga diyosdiusang mister na laging
puputákputák sa Pilipinas. Kararating laang niyá noóng umágang iyon
sa báyan ng Libís.

Sa walang tígil na kalalákad, siya'y sumapit sa tapát ng isáng tindahán
ng álak. Lumapit. At pagkatapos na matingnán ng isang tinging-uháw ang
mga boteng naggigilásan sa loob, ay sinutsután pagdaka ang may-áring
si Julio at ípinahiwatig dito ang kanyang ibig.

Ibig niya ay makitang umíkot ang mundó, dapwa't sa kasamáng palad
ay walang dalang maibabáyad sa magpapaíkot; kaya't isanamó niyang
siya'y pautangin.

Si Julio ay di pumayag; sapagka't totoóng malabis ang pag-aalinlángan
niya sa táong ito, na hanggá ng hanggá ay noón lamang natamaan ng
kanyang matá. Sa mukhâ, pananamit, mga anyô, pananalitâ ng bagong
datíng, ay wala siyang sukat mabanaágang tandâ ng pagkamalínis
na budhî.

Dahil sa walang màliw na pagtanggí ni Julio, ay biglang umínit ang
tuktók ng maginoong mister.

Ipinalálagáy daw siyang masamâng tao na di marúnong magbáyad ng
utang--sa makatwid, tulad na ng magnanákaw! Sa nóong kunót ng kausap,
ay isang malamig na ngitî ang itinugón ni Julio.

--"Hindi pô iyan ang dahil";--anya--"talagá pong naugalían na ng
aming tindahan ang huwag magpaútang sa mga di naniniráhan dito,
kaya't inyong ipagpatawad."

At hinagísang muli ng isang ngitî ang nabigô. Nguni't hindi naampát
ang dingas. Lalong sumikláb ang sigâ. Kumanyón na nang sunód-sunód at
walang lagót, ang Diyos Bungángá. Katákot-tákot na bála ng pag-alimurà
ang lumagpák sa mga taynga ni Julio! Ito'y nakapagpígil sandalî,
dapwa't sandalî lamang, at di na nakapagbatá ang kanyang dangal. Ang
palángitî niyang mukhâ, ay bigláng nagdilím. Yaóng tumitibók sa
kabilâ ng kanyang dibdíb, ay bigláng napukaw. Natikom ang mga daliri,
nanginig ang mga bísig.

--"Ginoo!"--ang inihadláng ni Julio sa nagpúpuputók--"wika ko
sa inyo'y di ko kayó pauutángin at ang pasyá kong itó ay waláng
pagkatinag! Walang tao sa ibabaw ng lupà na may kapangyaríhan pumílit
upang bagúhin ko ang aking salitâ. Ako ba'y inyóng nauunawàan?..."

Pagkasábi nitó, si Julio ay tumalikod nang kauntî. Sinamantalá ang
pagkakataóng iyon ng kanyang kaalít. Maliksíng hinúgot ang daláng
rebólber, lumundág sa loób ng tindáhan at pinukól ng tatangnán ang úlo
ni Julio. Ito'y nanghinà nang kauntî, gayón ma'y hinaráp niyá nang
pangatawánan ang mapangahás. Di naglaon at gumúlong kapwà sa sahíg;
animo'y nililindól ang tindáhan; ang mabuway na kinahahanayán ng mga
bóte ng alak, ay nátagilid; gumuhô ang lahat ng lamán. Katákot-tákot
na íngay! Dumalóng nagtutumilî ang dalagang anák ni Julio. Isang
sípang ikinasubásob ng binibíning nananángis, ang dito'y isinalúbong
ng halimaw. Kahabág-habág na mag-amá!

Sa karátig na tindahan ay may ibáng nangyayari:

Dalawáng pulís ng bayan at si Gerardo ang nahandoon. Si Gerardo
ay isang binatang maglálabing-siyám ang gúlang: Matibay na pusò,
maliwanag na isip, katawáng malakás, at mapangahás na loob sa alin
mang gawàing mapanganib.

Mula pa sa mga unang sandaling mabanaágan ni Gerardo ang masakláp na
bunga ng mga sagútan ni Julio at ng kaniyang kalában, ay sinimulán
na niya ang pagpapaála-ála ng kanilang katungkúlang sa mga pulís na
nataunán niya roon; alalaong baga'y mamagitnâ silá sa dalawa.

Umakmáng lalapit ang mga pulís, di ang hindi. Datapwa't sa masamáng
pagkakataón, ay násabay ang paglápit na ito sa pagbunot ng rebólber
ng kaaway ni Julio. Isip yata'y sila na ang susugúrin, kaya't biglâng
nangamutlâ at dáli-dáling nangagsiúrong.

--"Ano't tíla kayo'y nátukâ ng áhas?"--ang pagdáka'y itinanóng ng
binata sa bayáning mga pulís.

--"Abá!"--ang kaniláng tugón--"kami ba'y mga ulól at ipapáin ang
áming búhay sa kamatáyan? Di mo ba nakikita't marrikáno iyang may
'ribulber'? Kami'y waláng kaarmás-armás, kung kami'y labánan, anó
ang aming magagawâ?"

Nagngitngít si Gerardo sa mga salitâng ito.

--"Mga duwag!"--ang malakás niyang sigaw na sinabayan ng isang
matinding túlak sa mga pulis na kamunti nang ikinábaligtád nilá;
at di lamang ito ang nagawâ: nilabnót pa sa mga bayaning iyon ang
dala-daláng mga batúta.

Singtulin ng kidlat na dumaló ang binatà sa sigalót.







II

¡SAKÂ KAYÓ MAGSISÍSI!...


Si Julio sa mga sandaling iyón, ay latâng latâ na sa kanyang
pakikilámas; kaya't ang pagdalo ni Gerardo ay napapanahón. Pagpások
ng binatà sa loob ng tindáhan ay sinigawan siya ng kalában ni Julio
na huwag manghimások sa kanilá. Hawak nitó ang rebolber; dapuwa't sa
gayóng anyô ng kaáway, ang batóng loób ni Gerardo ay lalong tumigás
mandín, lalong nabuhay ang kanyang dugô. Waláng ágam-ágam na lumápit
sa nananampalásan, at úbos lakas na inihátaw sa ulo nitó ang daláng
káhoy; nguni't ang hinataw ay nakapagpaputók din, at saka dahan-dahang
nahílo, nalugmók, nawalán ng diwâ.

--"Mang Julio, nakagantí na kayó!!"--ang noó'y biglang pumúlas sa
mga labi ng mapúsok na binatà.

Tumagís ang bála sa kaliwang bisig ni Gerardo.

Tumutulò ang kaniyang dugô; samantalang sa tapat ng tindáhan ay
nagkakatípon ang mga táong páwang pagpuputlaan, nagluluwángan ang
mga matá, at naghahabaán ng liig.

Isang lalaking mataás ang di nagluwat at pumások; siya ang sargento
ng mga pulís. Kasunod niya ang dalawáng bayani ng sindák. Nilapitan
ang binatà at tumanong:

--"Bakit inágaw ninyó ang mga batúta ng mga pulis na iyan?"

Hinagísan muna ni Gerardo ng isang nagbabágang tingin ang tatlóng
kawal na iyón ng pamunúan bágo tumugón:--

--"Sapagka po't áking kinailángan sa pagsugpô sa kapaslangan ng
isang táong ganíd! Ngayón na di ko na kinakailángan, sila'y akin
nang isinasaulì."--At inaabót ng binata ang mga batuta sa sargento,
na muling tumanong:

--"At bakit naman sila'y di man laang ninyo pinagpitaganan?"

--"Sapagka't iyang inyong mga pulís ay mga duwag!"--ang napabiglang
tugon ng binata.--"Sapagka't sila'y aayaw magsitupad sa kaniláng
katungkúlan; nakíta, ng kaniláng mga matá ang gayóng pagyúrak at
paglaít sa kaniláng mga kabalát, ang gayong pagluhà ng Matwid;
at gayon man, sa haráp ng karáwaldáwal na nangyari, ang mga
pulís na iya'y di nag-kaloób na kumílos, humalukipkíp na lámang,
nagpatáy-patáyan!... Ganyan po ba ang mag-iingat ng kapayapaan? Sa
mga táong gaya nila'y anó ang mahihintáy ng Báyan? Walá! kundi isang
di makakátkát na kahihiyán at pagpulà sa kanyá ng ibáng láhì!..."

Dito'y hinaráp ang nagsisiksíkan at nagngangang mga tao sa labás
ng tindahan; ibináling muna ang paningín sa lahát ng dáko at sakâ
nagpatúloy:

--"Sa mga sandalíng itó, mga kababáyan, huwag lilimútin na ang Matá
ng boong Sangdaigdigán ay napapakò dito sa Pilipinas. Báwa't kilos,
báwa't gawâ, pagkakámalí ó pagkakásulong, ay minamasdan nilá. Kinukúro,
tinitimbàng lahát na iyân, upang pagkatápos ay pasiyáhan kun táyong
mga pilipino ay may matwíd ó walâ sa paghingî ng Kalayáan! Kaya nga
nararápat na sa mga araw na itó ay magpakaíngat tayo sa áting mga
kílos. Huwag tutulútang makasinag dito ang mga tagá ibáng lupâ, ng
anó máng gawáng maipupulà sa atin. Iyáng kahináan ng loob, tákot sa
mga gawang lában sa katwíran, ay di nararápat kailán man na ipamálas
ng isáng báyang gaya nito, na naghahangád lumayà. Upang ang báyang
iya'y kaalang-alanganan ng ibá, ay kailangang ipakíta sa lahát nang
panahón, na ang kanyang mga anak ay di natutulog sa hangad ng ibáng
dungisan at idiwarà ang kanyang puri't karangálan--Iyang mahálay na
pag-aalaála sa saríli na nababagay láang sa mga loob na marurupók ay
kinakailangang iwaksi sa mga ganitong pagkakataón; sapagka't ang malíng
pag-aalaálang iyán ay siyang nagdudulot ng karupukán sa pusò, siyang
nagpapatúlog sa dugô, gumuguló sa isip, at nagpapaúrong sa kaluluwá
úpang lumayô at tumalikod sa pangánib na dapat sagupàin at sugpuin!"...

Napútol ang salitâ ni Gerardo, dahil sa bigláng pagkílos ng
nalulugmók. Násaulì na ang pagkatáo, idinílat ang  mga matá at titindig
sana, nguni't ¿sino yaong  nasa kanyáng haráp at pígil sa kamay ang
isang rebólber na nakaúmang sa kanya?... Nápaupông muli. Sino itó? Si
Kamatáyan na ba?  Kakalawitin na kayâ siya? Inapúhap sa likód ang
kanyang sandata: dapwa't walâ!... Lálong namutlâ ang mukhâ, lalong
nanginíg ang katawán.

Nangusap ang kinatatakútan sa wikà ni Shakespeare:

--"Kung ang búhay mo'y iyóng pinahahalagahán ay huwag kang
kikilos!... Nauunawáan mo ba?"

Isa na lamang tangô ng pagáyon ang naitugón ng nangangatál, sapagka't
di maibuká ang bibig, di mabigkás ang íbig sabíhin.

Nagpatúloy si Gerardo.

--"Ibig kong mabatíd kung ikáw ay taga-saán."

--"A-a-amerikano", ang maráhang sagót ng nanglálamig.

--"Ah!, amerikano!... amerikano!"--ang úlit ng binatà, na may kahálong
mapaít na ngitî.--"At anó ang sumuót sa amerikáno mong tuktók at ikáw
ay nanánampalásan díto?"

--"..........."

--"Ang akála mo ba'y sapagka't natúran kang amerikáno at ang kaharáp
mo'y mga kayumanggí ay maaárì mo nang yurákan ang kaniláng karapatán
at isalúsak ang kaniláng karangálan?...

"Di mo na inalaálang silá ay iyóng kapwà? na silá ay iyóng kapantáy?

"Oh, kayóng mga dayuhang halímaw!

"Sino kayóng paparíparíto sa isang báyang di inyó at pag-náhandito
na'y walang kakalasagin kundí ang pangdadahás at paghaharìharìan?

"Iyán bagá ang inyong igagantí sa báyang itó na kahima't hiráp na'y
tiís pa rin nang tiís, masunód lang kayó? kahi't hapô na'y híla pa
rin nang híla, kayó lámang ay mapagbigyáng loob?

"Ah, mga  walang túring!.... Mga pusòng masasakím at mapagmatáas!

"Di na ninyó inísip na doon sa Langit ay may isáng Diyós!--Isáng Diyos
na nagmamasíd sa inyóng mga kilos, isáng Diyos na walang kinikilíngan,
ang Diyos na huhukóm sa inyóng mga gawâ!!...

"May araw ring kayó'y sasayáran ng Kanyáng kamay, may araw
rìng lalagpák sa inyóng mga úlo ang mabisàng sumpâ at higantíng
kakilákilábot ng isáng Báyang dinadayá!

"Ah! mga kahabághabág!... Sakâ kayó magsisísi!!..."

Hindî nasáyang ang mga salitâ ni Gerardo: sa labás ng tindáhan ay
boong báyan na halos ang sa kanya'y nakikiníg.

Pagkaráan ng iláng sandalî ay pinatindíg ang amerikano. "Lumabás ka
rito"--aniya,--"at humaráp ka ngayon din sa hukóm."

Ang inutusan ay nakayukông tumindíg, nakayukông lumabás at nakayukông
sumapít sa pintô ng hukuman. Sinusundan siya nina Julio, Gerardo at
ng maraming táong bayan.

Di naláon at dumatíng ang mga nagsasakdál sa tanggápan ng hukóm;
nguni't sa masamáng pagkakátaon, itó noo'y walâ sa loob ng bayan. May
nagsasabing siya'y napa sa Maynilà, at di máalaman kun kaylán babalík.

Inaharáp ang sakdál sa pangalawáng hukóm, dapwa't ito'y tumanggíng
lumítis sa usapín, sapagka't siyá'y kamag-anak ng nagsasakdál na
si Julio.

Ayon sa kautusán, ang presidente municipal ng isang bayan ay siyang
mákakahalíli ng mga hukóm kapág ang mga ito'y walang kaya ó karapatáng
lumitis sa isang usapíng "criminál". Sapagka nga't ito ang ipinaguútos,
ang mga magsasakdal noon di'y nagsitungo sa báhay-pamunúan upang
dumulóg sa haráp ng presidente.







III

SI KÁPITANG MEMÒ.


Máximo San Jórge de los Santos ang túnay na ngalan ni Kápitang Memò,
ulo ng yaman at presidente municipal sa Libís. Siya ay isang lalaking
may matáas na tindig, mukhâng bilóg na kinabábanaagan ng ilang paták
ng dugông diláw, úlong tihabâ na napapalamutíhan ng mapuputing buhók,
mga matáng busóg na animo'y ipinaglihí sa mga matá ni Mutsu-Hito,
ilóng na hinirám kay San Mateo, bibig na inihawig sa bibig--Limahóng
at tiyang kauri ng tiyang--Taft.

Ang máginoong itó ay isá riyán sa mga nábantog na kápitan noong
mga araw na ang Pilipinas ay kasalukúyang iniinís ng kakastilàan;
siya'y nábantog, sapagka't tangì sa masalapî, ay lubhâng malupít sa
mga táong bayan, mapagbalák ng mga masasagwâng útos na pawàng udyók ng
kasakimán, mapagparátang at mapagparusa ng mga parúsang háyop sa mga
binúbuhátang nagkásala. Walang tumutol sa mga hidwâ niyáng kagagawán
na di niyá sinumbatán ó pinangakùan ng ganitó ó gayóng pagkapahámak.

Ibig supilin ang lahát; paáno'y walâ siyáng pinakamimithî kundî
ang sambahín, kilalánin at tawaging harì--harì sa lahat ng bagay,
harì ng lahát ng táò, kung mangyayári, ng kanilang mga pag-aarì,
katawán at damdamin... Iyan ang kanyang adhikà sa gitnâ ng gayóng
mga nagyukòng masunúrin, mga tikóm na bibig, mga dilàng alípin.

Iyán ang kanyáng pinangápangárap, ang boô niyáng hangad mulâ
sa sandalîng mapasakanyà ang tungkód ng kápitan--ang mahiwagà't
makapangyarihang tungkód na siyáng lálong pinagkakautangan ng kanyáng
pagkamasalapî, pagkamalupain, at pagkamapalalò.

Sa haráp ng ganyáng mga adhikà, katakátaká kayâ na nang mabágo ang
pámahalaan, pagkalagánap dito ng kautusáng nagpapahintúlot sa mga
bayán-bayán ng maláyang pagpilì sa kanikanilang pinunò; katakátaká
kayâ na maisipan ni Kápitang Memò na samantalahin ang pagkakátaon sa
pagbabakásakáling siya ang máhalal na presidente sa kanyang bayan?

Alám ni Kápitang Memò na lubhâng marami ang kanyáng kaáway; na ang
kanyáng kabangisán ng panahóng lumípas ay di pa nalilimot ng mga
manghahalál; na ang tákot at pangingilag sa kanyá ay di pa nakakatkát
sa mga apdó ng karamíhan; na ang kanyáng kalupitán sa pamumunò ay
sariwàng-sariwà sa kanilang alaala. Batid ni Kapitang Memò ang lahát
ng iyan. At iyan ang mga dahil kung bakit siya'y maláon ding nabalisa
at nagalinlangan, bago natuluyang magharáp ng kanyang kandidatura sa
nálalapit na halalán.

Dápwa't hindî ang isang Kápitang Memò ang uúrong. Bakit ba hindî niyá
titikmán? Ay anó kun sakálì ma't siyá'y mátalo? Hindî ba siyá datihan
sa pagkatálo ... sa mga templo ng San Jórge at mga titiláok?

--"Walâ! walâng úrong-úrong!" ang matigás niyáng sábi sa kanyá rin.

At hindî nga namán umúrong.

Sinimulan na ang pangatawanang paglákad.

Nagkatúsak ang kanyang mga leaders na walâng humpáy ng talumpatì dini
at talumpatì doón.

Nagpagawâ sa Maynilà ng libo-libong carteles na kinatítitikan ng
mga salitang:


                               VOTAD POR
                 Sr. D. Maximo San Jorge de los Santos.
                       CANDIDATO para PRESIDENTE.
                    Libertad, Igualdad, Fraternidad.


Sa di kawasà'y dumatíng ang áraw ng halalán. Dumatíng ang oras ng
pagbílang ng mga boto.

Nápagaláman sa wakás na tatlong-daan at limá ang bilang ng boto kay
Kápitang Memò; samantalang dádalawang-dáan at ánim ang tinanggap ng
kaniyang kapáligsahan.

¡Talinghagà ng mga pangakong matatamis!

¡Talinghagà ng mga gantíng-palang makalansing!

¡Talínghagà ng mga mukhâng-hudas na nakangitî!...

Tigás na tuwâ ng Kápitan.

Sa tatlong araw na sumunod sa halalán, si Kápitang Memò tuwing magiisá,
maging sa pagkain, maging sa paghigâ hanggang sa pagtulog, ay wálang
nábibigkas kundî ang gayari:

--"Sa makatwid, ako ay presidente na ngayón ha! ha! ha! At sa
makatwid, akó ay makapangyarihan na namán! ha! ha! ha!... Ganitó,
ganitó ang mabubuhay ... láging nasa itáas, láging tinitingalâ at
hindî nasusuwáy! ha! ha! ha!"

Iyán ang si Kápitang Memò.







IV

ANG MGA MÁGINOO...


Talagá yatàng sinasamâ ang mga magsasakdal. Ang presidenteng sinadyâ
sa bahay-pámunuan ay walâ rin doon.

Hindi pa dumárating. Ang oras na iyon ay hindi pa oras ng pagdatíng
ni Kápitang Memò sa kanyang tanggápan. Iyón ay oras lamang ng kanyang
pagbángon, ng paghiwaláy sa mapanghalína niyang higàan, ng pagpapaalam
sa isang kinawilihang pangarap....

Si Kápitang Memò ay di nararápat bumangon ng maága; hindi ito nababágay
sa kanya. Siya'y isang máginoo, isang kápitan, isang presidente na
sumasahod buwán-buwán ng walongpúng pisong matunóg. Bumángong maága
ay nababágay lámang sa mga mahihirap, sa mga magsasaká, sa kanyang
mga kasamá, alila at mga hindi máginoong gaya niya.

Tinutugtóg ang ikasampung oras nang si Kápitang Memò ay magbángon
noong umagang iyón. Ang mga hikáb niyang sunodsunod at mga matáng
pipikitpikit ay nagpapakilálang di pa nasisiyahán sa túlog. At mulî
sanang mahahandusáy ang mahal nating ginoo, dangan at nagitlá sa
íngay ng maraming táo na noó'y naghuhugusan sa tapát ng kanyang
báhay. Ang mga táong ito'y siyang kasunódsunód nina Gerardo mulâ
ng iwan nila ang tindahan ni Julio; ibig sana nilang mapanoód ang
paglilítis, dapwa't nabuktót na lahat sa pagiintáy sa presidente,
kaya't ngayo'y nangaguuwian na. Salámat sa ingay nila at nabugábog
ang masipag na pinunò ng bayan; sa wakás ay natulúyan ding mámulat ang
mga namumugtông matá na animo'y nagsasábing "¡Kami ay busóg na busóg!"

Pagkakáin ng almusalán, ang ating máginoo ay humílig sa isang
sillón; at dito'y sinimulán ang waláng lagót na pagpapaúsok sa isang
"Germinal".

Hinintáy pa munang mangalahátì ang sagisag na iyón ng isa sa mga
masasamáng hilig ng tao, bágo nagbihis si Kápitang Memò upang dumaló
sa bahay-pamunuan.

Tinutugtóg ang ika labing-isáng óras ng umága nang siya'y sumapit
doón. Pagpások na pagpások ng pintô, ay isang tuksó ang kaagád ay
sumagupà sa kanyá. Sa dákong kaliwâ ay may isang malápad na bangkô at
sa ibabaw ng bangkô ay nakatukmól ang isang pulís na uugâ-ugâ ang ulo,
nakabuká ang bibig, at untî-untîng nábababâ ang mga balintataó. Sa
ganitong anyô na bilang pasalúbong sa kanya ng káwal niyang hinihíla ni
Antók, ang makisig na pinunò ay biglang siniglán ng pangungupinyó. Anó
ba't ang buísit na iyon eh, tila ginagagád ang anyô niya kanina ng
siya'y bago lang kagigísing?

Dáhandáhang lumápit ang nagngingitngít, sinunggabán sa bátok ang
tuksó at walang sábi-sábi'y niluglóg ito ng walang kapatúpatumanggâ.

--"Ah, salbáhe! demónyo! di nahúli rin kitá!... Iyán, (suntok)
iyán, (sipa) at iyán (dagok) ang bágay sa iyo, tamád! walang
hiyâ! háyop! Kung kayâ ka bá binabayáran ng sampúng piso buwán-buwán
ay para magtulóg ka rito? Waláng hiyâ!"

Gitláng gitlá ang pinupog ni Kápitang Memò. Sa kagulatan ay nakálundag
tuloy sa di oras ng limáng dipá.

Samantalang nagbúbubusá ang bibíg ng Kápitan ang iba namang mga pulís
ay pawang nagpuputlàan at nanginginíg, lahat ay nangagtáyò ng tuwid
na tuwid, walang makahumá kahi't isa.

Pagkatápos ng ganitong pagpapakíta ng gilas sa silong, ang mabangís
na punò ay dahandahang nanhík na nanglilisik ang mga matá.

Sina Gerardong inis na inis na sa pagiintáy ay napabuntóng-hiningá
na lamang ng maramdamang siya'y dumádating.







V

SA LIKÓD NG KASALUKÚYAN


"Aba, mang Julio", ang bigkás ng binatà; "lumuhód po kayó at nárito
na ang ating Czar!"

Si Julio'y napabulalás ng tawa.

"Angkáp na angkáp nga sa kanyá ang ngalang iyan!"

Hindi lumawig ang pagtatawá ni Julio; humalili sa kanya ang
isang pagkamanghâ, pagkatapos na maibáling ang paningin sa dákong
hagdánan. Pati si Gerardo ay nápa-abá!...

Katakátaká nga nama't lubhâng mahiwagà ang mapapansín ng isang
nagmamasíd sa pinamagatáng Czar na sa sandalíng iyón ay kapapanhík
pa lamang.

Pagkákitang pagkákita sa amerikánong isasakdál (na noó'y nagkátaong
nakatalíkod at kasalukúyang nawiwíli sa pagtingin sa isang nakasábit
na magandang laráwan ng nunò ng mga Federál,) ang presidente ay
natigilan nang biglâng biglâ; túlos na túlos sa púnò ng hagdanan;
ang mga matá ay pinanáwan ng panglilisik at kúsang napakò sa likod
ng amerikáno. Tumindíg sina Julio at nagbigáy ng "magandang araw",
dapwa't ni tangô, ni tingin man lang, ni ano pa mang tandâ ng paggantí,
ay dí sila nagkamít.

Papaáno'y ang boông pag-iisip ni Kápitang Memò ay nabubuntón sa
isásakdál na mulâ, nang tamáan ng kanyáng matá ay pinasikdósikdó ang
loob niyá nang gayón na lang. ¡Kanyá mandín natatandâan ang húbog ng
pangangatawán ng amerikánong itó!... Túnay nga kayáng ito'y si ... si
... si Stag?

Habang nagtatagál ang kanyang pagmamasíd ay lalò at lalòng nakikilála
ang pinagmamasdán.

Isang matinding tikím na kinaugalían, at isáng magasláw na kilos ng
nakatalíkod, at ... ¡biglang namutlâ ang natutúlos sa punò ng hagdán!

Ang tikím at kilos na iyón ay kilaláng-kilalá niya; wala kundi si
Stag lang ang marunong kumílos at tumikím ng ganoon.

"At bakit itó'y nápaparíto ngayón?..."--ang kahi't di sinasadya'y
naibulong sa sarilí ng namumutlâng pinunò--"Akó kayâ ang talagáng
hanap?... Alam kayáng presidente na ako ngayón?... Maánong huwag
ng maalaála...!"

Hindî man ibig ni Kápitang Memò ay kusang ipinadpád siya ng kanyang
gunitâ sa panahóng nagdáan--sa taóng 189...--sa isang háting-gabíng
madilím nang silang dalawá ng amerikánong itó, ay magkasámang lumanság
sa isang pintóng nakalápat sa lalawigang Tarlak.

Sariwàng sariwà pa sa kanyáng alaála ang mga nangyari noón! Hindi,
oh hindî niya malilimutan ang pagkaparoól ng isang amá, isang amáng
tagalog, na noo'y walang malay na naligò sa sariling dugô--dugông
pinaágos ng kanyang kamay, kamay niya--ni Kápitang Memò!

Hindi pa rin nakakatkát sa kanyang gunitâ ang mga himutók, at
pananambítan ng dalágang anák ng amáng iyon--anák na sa isang sandalî
ay inagáwan ng magúlang, at pinagnakáwan ng tánging kayamánan ng
isang dalága: ang saríling púri. At ang nagnákaw, ang naglubálob sa
lusák sa púring iyón ay siyá rin, siya--si Kápitang Memò!

At lalong hindî pa rin nalilingíd sa kanyáng guniguni ang kináng at
dámi ng pilak na sa bahay ding iyon ay kanyáng nalíkom. Ang pílak
na itó ay umabót sa halagáng -P-10,000--salapîng pinagkayariang
hatiin nilang dalawá ni Stag na lubhang malaki ang pagod na ginugol
sa kapangahasa't katampalasánang iyon. Ang paghaháting ito, sapagka't
hindí maáring gawin noon din, ay ipinagpaliban sa umága ng kinabukasan
at sa bahay ni Kápitang Memò sa Tarlák.

Dapwa't ang paghahatì ay di natupad: noon ding gabing iyon, ang
makisig at túsong kápitan ay nakalipád sa ibang lupálop. Tagláy
niya ang -P-10,000 piso at isang sariwàng katawán. Sa minsang sabi,
si Stag ay nàlinlang niya, ni Kápitang Memò!....

Ang Kápitan ay papanáog na sána at ang tangka'y umuwî noón din upang
siya'y makapagtágò sa pinangingilágan.

Dapwa't, ¡hulí na! Hindi pa man lang nakatátalikod ay hinaló na siya
nang sunódsunód ng dati niyang kasákasama.

Kun sa pagbatì sa Kápitan ang bibig ni Stag ay nakangitî ang kaluluwá
naman niya'y nagngingitngit sa pagsigáw ng: "Háyop, di ka na muling
makawawalâ sa akin!"

Ang kaawà-awàng presidente ay hindî na nakatulóy ng pagpanáog. Anó
ang dápat niyáng gawin ngayón? Wala, kundî ang maglakás loob. Hinaráp
ang kanyang dáting kaibígan at bumigkás ng ganitóng mga pangungúsap:

"¡Oh, si Mr. Stag! Kayo palâ! Hindi ko kayó nákilala! Ipagpatáwad
ninyo! Saán kayó gáling? Ang akalá ko'y umuwî na kayó sa
Amérika. Nguni't magtulóy, magtulóy kayó!"

Binuksán ang pintô ng tanggapan ng presidente at silang dalawá ay
nagsipások.

Maláwig ang kaniláng salitàan. Tuwâng tuwâ, si Stag nang maaláman
na itong kaibígan niyá ay "umasénso" na palâ. At laló pa mandíng
nag-ibáyo ang kanyáng pagkatuwâ nang maalámang ang batà niya'y siya
palâng huhukóm sa usapín niláng dalawá ni Julio. Si Kápitang Memò
namán ay punông punô ng salitáng "patáwad!" Bawa't pangungúsap niyá
ay may kalákip na isang "patáwad!" Walang magasláw na salitâ si Stag
na di niya tinugón ng isang malambíng na "patáwad!"...

Natápos ang kaniláng lihim na pagpapanáyam pagkaráan ng isang óras
at kalahatì.

Binuksán ng presidente ang pintò ng kanyáng opisina at sinigawán
ang sargento ng mga pulís. Ang tináwag ay hálos mag-kandarapà sa
pagmamadalî nang pagharáp sa kanyang pinunò.

"Papasukin dito iyang mga táong may ihaharáp na sakdál", ang utos
ng presidente.

"Opó, señor!"--ang tugón naman ng sargento.







VI

¡TALAGÁNG PALALÒ!


Iká isáng óras ng hápon nang máharap sa presidente siná Julio
at gayón ma'y malaon pa ring sila'y naghintáy na hindî man lang
kinikibô. Sinamantala ni Gerardo ang panahón; pinagaralan sandalî ang
nalalaráwan sa mga mukhâ ni Kápitang Memò at ng kanyang katóto. May
isa siyang hinalà, na ibig maláman kung túnay ó hindî. Tiningnáng
una ang amerikano. Ibáng ibá ito ngayón: walâ na ngayón ang úlong
kanína'y nakayukô; walâ na rin ang mga lábing kanína'y nangangatál;
walâ na ngayón ang mga matáng duwág na kanina'y dî makalában sa
kanyá ng títig. Ibáng ibá ngâ ngayón si Stag; mistúlang harì na
namán na íbig magpasukò sa lahát, pati sa Diyos! Ang báwa't títig
niyá kay Kápitang Memò, wari'y naghahatíd ng mga ganitóng salitâ:
"Ako ang panginóon mo ngayón. Ó ako'y ililigtás mo sa usapíng itó,
ó ang úlo mo'y aking paliliparín! Mamilì ka!"

Sa bawa't títig ni Stag na may ganitóng kahulugán ang kápitan ay may
isang magiliw na tugón:

"Huwág kang magalaála katóto... Madalî ang pagliligtás sa iyó."

May katwíran si Kápitang Memò sa kanyang sinabi: ililigtás niyá si
Stag at ang paráan na kanyáng gagamítin ay madalîng madalì. ¡Dadaánin
sa bagsik, sa dahás, sa sigáw! Aling kaluluwá sa boóng báyang iyón
ang di manginginíg sa isa niyáng dárag, sa isa niyang pandidílat?...

Síno doón ang di niya mapaaáyon sa kanyáng maibígan? Walâ! Síno ang
mangangahás na makipagsagútan ó makipagtálo sa kanyá? Walâ! Síno ang
humaráp sa kanyá na di niya napayukô? Walâ!

Ngunì't ... si Gerardo? Si Gerardo! Pshé! Síno iyán? Isang
nagtatapáng-tapángan; isang palalò, hambóg, walâng gálang! Iyan
ang hangál na láging lumilibák sa kanyang pagkapinúnò. Iyan ang
nagdudunúng-dunúngan na tumatáwa sa palákad ng kanyáng pamahalàan. Iyan
ang ulól na maláon nang iniíbig niyáng másukol sa isang súlok úpang
... máalis ang pagka-ulól!

Salámat, at ngayo'y násukol na niyá!

Ngayón niyá malalasáp ang tamís ng pakikipagtálo sa isang Kápitang
Memò.

Ngayon silá magkakaalám at ngayón magbabáyad ng mga útang ang hambóg
na iyan!

Pinanglísik ng Kápitan ang kanyang  mga matá, kinunót na mabuti ang
nóo at saka minasdan ang binatà......

Talagáng walâng hiyâ, talagáng hambóg, talagáng palalò!

Diyata't ang títig niyáng iyón ay dî man lang iginalang, hindi man
lang ininó? Diyáta't hindî man lang kumisáp, diyata't ang ulo'y hindî
inayukô? Ano't ang anyô ng "ulol" na itó ay animo'y nanghahamón,
animo'y nagtatawá, nangungutyâ? Bakit at ang mga kamáy ay hindî
nakahalukipkíp, bakit hindi namumutlâ, bakit hindi nanginginíg gayóng
nasa haráp niyá--niyá, ni Kápitang Memò?...

Nang mamalas ito ng mabalasik na pinunò, ang di masáyod na pagkapóot
niya sa dati nang kinapopoótang binatà, ay lalong nagíbayo, lalo
siyang ininís.

Sa wakas, ay hindi na nakapagpigil, hindi na nakapagbatá: inalabás
na ang pagka-Kápitang Memò!







VII

HALAGÁ NG BÚHAY


Pagkatápos na masípang makaitló ang inupáng silla, ang presidente ay
hinaráp si Gerardo at nanginginíg na tumanóng:

--"Ikaw! anó ang daládalá mong iyán?"

Lumápit ang binatà sa mesa ng hukóm, inilapág doón ang rebolber ni
Stag, at saka sumagót:

--"Iyan po, G. Presidente, ay...."

--"Sssttt!!" ... ang putol ni Kápitang Memò; "Ang rebólber na
iyán ay akíng kilalá, kilalá ko! Alam ko na ang may arì diyan ay
hindi ikáw. Bakit at ngayo'y nasasa iyó? Bakit ayaw mong ibigay sa
may arì? Ha? Bakit ka nakikialám sa arì ng may arì? Ha? Bakit at
kabatang-batà mo pa ay lubhâ kang mapanghimások? Vamos á ver!..."

--"Ginóo!" ... ang hadlang ni Gerardo.

Ang Kápitan ay dî napigil:

--"O ngayón di'y isasaulì mo iyán sa tunay na may arì, ó papások ka
sa bilangúan! Mamilì ka!..."

Isang madiîng suntók sa mesa ang isinunod sa "bilangúan."

--"Magdahandahan, po tayo...!"

--"Anóng dáhandáhan!"

--"Napakabilís pò kayóng humátol, G. Presidente. Ang útos mo pò"...

"Ha?" ang pakli ng pinunò. "Ang aking útos? Ay anó ang aking
útos? Ang útos ko ay tumpák, nasasálig sa matwíd! At anó? Hindi
ba matwíd ang ipasaulì ang arì ng may arì? Kun ayaw kang sumunód,
kun ikaw ay magmamatigás, kun di mo isasaulì ang rebolber na iyán,
ngayon di'y papások ka sa..."

"Kahi't pô saán ako'y handáng pumások," ang matigás na sagót
ni Gerardo; "ibig ko po lang dinggín ninyó ako sandalî kung
mangyayari. Tingnán ninyo: ako'y inyong pinipílit na isaulì ko ang
rebolber na itó sa amerikanong iyán. Wika ko po sa inyo'y waláng
kailangang ako'y inyóng pilítin, walang kailángang ako'y inyó pang
baláan at lálong waláng kailangang kayo'y magpadiníg ng mga ganganyáng
pangungúsap at magpakíta ng mga ganganyáng kílos na mulâ ng likhâin
ang hukúman ay di nakikíta sa alin mang hukóm na may iwing dangál. Ang
lahát ng iyán ay hindî kailangan, ang sábi ko, sapagka't tantuín mo
pô, G. Presidente, na ang isá sa mga dáhil ng áking ikináparito, ang
isá sa mga dáhil kung kayâ ko napagtiisán ang hálos kalaháting áraw na
pagiintáy sa inyóng kamahálan, ay upang áking maibigáy kaagád sa ilálim
ng kapangyaríhan ng hukúman ang sandatang itó na tinikis kong kúnin
sa nagmamayarì. At ang dahil po kung kayâ ko tinikís ito ay sapagká't
sa pamamagítan ng sandátang iyán, ay muntí na niyang baságin ang ulo
nitong aking kasáma, at kung nagkataon ay munti na niyang alisan ako
ng búhay. Naito pô ang aking sugat na hangga ngayo'y dumudugo pa"....

--"Sugat!" ang hadláng ng hukóm na may kahálong ingos; "At anó ang
mapatutunáyan ng sugat na iyán? Kung kayâ ka sinugátan ng iyong
kalában ay sapagka't hinátaw mo siyá sa ulo!"

--"Kung kayá ko pô siya ginanón ay sapagka't lumábag siya sa átas ng
matwíd, yumúrak siya sa kadakilàan ng tahánan at tinaksíl doón ang
isa niyang kapwà dáhil na dáhil lang sa di pagpáyag nitó sa hidwâ
niyáng nais!"...

--"At ikáw ba ang tinaksíl, ikaw ba ang tinampalásan?" ang tanóng ng
nandidilat na Kápitan.

--"Hindî pô ako, nguni't....."

--"Ikáw ba'y kamag-anak noón?"

--"Hindî pô, datapwa't....."

--"Ah! gayón pala, ay ano't ikáw ay nanghimások sa kanilá? Sino ka
bagá rito sa báyan?"

Hinagísan ni Kápitang Memò ang kaibigan niyáng noo'y walang
kakibô-kibô, ng isang tingin na wari'y nagsasábing: "Ligtás ka
ná!" Paniwalàng paniwalà siyá na ang mga hulí niyang salitâ ay
yuyukûang pílit ng binatàng katálo. Anó pa ang ikakatwiran ng
binatíllong uhúging iyón?

Nabigô ang pag-ása ni Kapitang Memò. Ang nóong iniintay na iyukô,
ay lálong ipanagtáasan.

--"Itinanóng mo pò," ang marahang sapól ni Gerardo, "kung ako'y síno
sa báyang itó. Hindî ko na pô sána kailángang sagutin iyán sapagka't
lábis na ninyóng talós. Gayon man ay pagbibigyan loob ko rin kayo. Akó
pô, G. Presidente, ay isang hámak na mámamayán, isang may mababàng
urì, isang musmós. Datapwa po't sa gitnâ ng aking pagkamababà, sa
gitnâ ng aking kamusmusán, ay may isá akóng kayamánang nakikilála
at maipagmamalakí--ang mga gintóng karapatán, ang mga katutubòng
kapangyarihan ng báwa't táong malayà.

"Karapatán pô at kapangyaríhan ng isáng táo na ipagtanggól ang saríling
búhay; kapangyaríhan din niyá ang itagúyod ang búhay ng ibá, ng isang
inaapí at tinatampalásan.

"Naitó pô ang dáhil kung bákit akó, akó na isang hámak, ako na
isang mababà, akó na isang musmos, ay nanghimások na mamagitnâ
sa amerikánong iyán at dito sa áking kasama nang sila'y nagaáway;
at náriyan din pô ang dáhil kung bákit di akó nagalinlángang hatawin
noóng sandalíng iyón iyáng inyóng katabí, na, kagáya ng lahat ng mga
duwág, ay sinamantalá ang isang pagkakalingat ng kanyáng kalában upang
ito'y lubós na mapipílan at nang sa gayo'y sumakanyá ang pagwawagí."

Si Kápitang Memò ay tumungó, nagsalikód-kamay at lumakad ng paroo't
parito.

Nagpatuloy ang binatà:

"Hindî ko nga pô lang ináring karapatán at kapangyaríhan ang
manghimások at ipagtanggól ang áking kakilála sa mapangánib niyang
kalagáyang yaón, kundî ibinílang ko pang isáng katungkúlan rin sa áking
lagáy na pagkatáong-báyan. Iyáng inyóng mga pulís na nangaroón, iyán
pông mga káwal ninyó na siyáng lálong may tungkúling tumupád sa áking
tinungkól, ang mga iyán na sakdál ng tatápang sa pagdárag sa kapwà
niláng tagálog at pagdahás sa mga mahihinà, ng mákitang amerikanong
malaki palá at hindî tagálog na maliit ang nanampalásan,--ang mga
iyan ay páwang nangagsitanggíng sumugpô sa gayóng katampalasánan,
pawang nangagsiúrong na animo'y hinágad ng libolibong kulóg. At ang
iminatwíd ay sapagka't may sandáta raw ang sinapantáhang Anti Kristo,
nguni't silá ay walâ!"

Biglâng tumígil ang pinunò sa kanyang inalakad-lákad; hinaráp si
Gerardo at di magkantutúto sa pagsigaw ng:

--"Pu--pu--pués, may katwíran silá! May katwiran siláng magingat;
at, at, at, ¿kung sila nga nama'y barilin? Hindi ba't ikaw rin ang
may sabing karapatan ng isang tao ang itaguyod ang saríling búhay?"

--"Tunay nga pô, dapwa't ang taal na púsong laláki--ang púsong
tinatangkílik ng karangálan--ang púsong nananálig at umiirog
sa matwid--ang púsong napopoót sa mga hidwâng ásal, ay huling
nagaala-ala sa kaniyang sarili, nililimot ang halagá ng saríling buhay
at iniíbig pang ito'y maparoól maipagtanggól lámang ang katwíran ng
isang kapwàng nilulúpig!"

--"Ha?"--ang pútol ni Kápitang Memò,--"di yata't pipilítin mo siláng
magpakamatáy, mailigtás lang ang búhay ng iba?"

--"Ang lahat pô, G. Presidente, ay dapat pangahasán kapag kailángan."

--"Kaululán!" ang sigáw ng pinunò na muling tumungó, nagsalikod
kamay at nagyao't dito--"Ang mga ulol na nagsasawa sa búhay ang
tangi lang makasusunód sa mga áral na iyán! Ang mga pulís ko ay hindi
mga ulól! Kung kayâ sila nangagsiúrong na gaya ng sabi mo ay hindî
sapagka't sila'y mga duwag, kundi sapagka't sila'y nátutong gumamit
ng ulo, natutong gumamit ng sentido común. Alám nilá ang halagá ng
búhay; silá ay mga padres de familia; may mga anak, asáwa, magulang
na sa kaniláng-kanilá lang umaása; bakin kayâ at hihinting sila'y
magpatiwakál?"-- at dito'y hinaráp na naman ang binatà.--"Bakit
sasawiín ang búhay nilá sa walang katuturán? At ang kaniláng mga
magulang, mga asawa, mga anák? Mapapantayán mo ba ang luhà at dalitàng
sasapítin ng mga ulílang iyán?"

--"Kung sakálì man pò, G. Presidente,"--ang banayad na sagót ni
Gerardo--"sakáli man pò at sinápit silá ng pagkasawî, ang mga
kamag-ának niláng maiíwan ay hindi dapat manghináyang ni dí dapat
ipaghinagpís ang kaniláng kamatáyan, sapagka't kagáya ng mga tunay
na laláki, sila'y nagpakamatáy sa pagtupád ng katungkúlan! Nábaon
man ang mga katawán nilá sa ilalim ng lupà, ang kaniláng alaála ang
kaniláng mga ngálan, ang kaniláng kabayaníhan ay makikintál sa diwa't
pusò ng kaniláng lahî upang kailan ma'y manariwà doón. Ang mga anák
nila, ang kaniláng kaapú-apúhan, at lahát káming mga bagong síbol ay
láging aawítin ang kadakilaan ng kaniláng gawâ, pipintuhúin námin at
igagálang ang kaniláng alaála, at sisikapíng tuláran ang inihasík
niláng halimbawà. Ang Ináng Báyan, ang pinakaiírog na Ináng Báyan
ay yayakápin ang kaniláng mga bangkáy, hahandugán silá ng matatamís
niyáng halík, at pagkatápos na maisúlat ang sagísag na "Mártyr" sa
kaniláng mga nóo, ay ituturò silá sa boóng Sangsinúkob, kasabáy ang
sábing:--'Ang mga anák ko ay mga bayáni ng Matwíd!'--May kamatáyan
pô bang diya'y dadakilà pa?"

--"Pshé!"--ang íngos ng presidente;--"que bayani ni que buláti ... que
bayani ng matwíd!--Bayani ng kaululán!" At pagkatápos na makámut
ang úlo ay nagpatúloy:--"Nguni't... pero ikáw ba namán ay walà nang
kaísip-ísip, at di mo makúrong ang pinagsasabí mong iyán ay pulós
na kahibangán? Síno bagá ang iyóng mapaniniwalá na... Jesús Maria
y José!--ako lang ay pinagtatawá mo! Diyáta't ako'y magpapakamatáy
mailigtás ko lang ang isa kong alílà, ang isang íta, ang isang
insík? Diyata?

"Laking kabulastugán!... Ha, ha, ha!"...

--"Ang isá pong magliligtas"--ani Gerardo--"ay hindî sinisíno ang
sinasaklolóhang napapangánib hindi inuúsisà kung ang ililigtás niya ay
kamag-anak, kaúrì ó hindî, hindî siya tumitingín sa kúlay ng balát;
ang kinukurò niyá ay kung nararapat na iligtás ang napapangánib:
alalaóng bagá'y kung ito'y kinakandilì ng katwíran".

Mulíng napahalakhák si Kápitang Memò; ang pagkapoòt niya kay Gerardo
at pagkatigagál sa mga pinagsasabí nito ay nagtatálo sa kanyáng
loób.--Iilíng-iling na sumagót:

--"Mga halíng na pag-iisip! mga halíng!... Palibhása't ikaw'y bátà pa,
ay hindî mo kinukurò ang iyong pinagsasabí."

Napangitî si Gerardo; muntî na siyáng mapa-Ehem!

--"Pero... Ibig mo bagáng ipakíta ko sa iyó ang kaululán ng iyóng
teoria?"--ang dagdág ng Kápitan na ngayo'y nagbóses-parè.

--"Ipagkákapuri ko pô, kung inyóng mamarapátin."

--"Bueno!".....

Si Kápitang Memò ay nagsindí muna ng isáng tabáko, bago nagpatúloy:

--"Makiníg ka:

"Sa kaníno mang táong may gadáling noó ang sariling búhay ay siyáng
lálong pinakámahalagá, siyáng pinakamámahal niyá higit sa alín mang
bágay at sa kaníno man.

"Ito'y isang katotohánang di mo mapupuwíng sa áking haráp; ako'y
matandâ na,... at kilalá ko ang lákad ng mundó.

"At sa katunayan ng aking sinábi ay náriyán ang líbolibong táong
napa-aalípin úpang magkaróon lang ng maipagtatawíd buhay; nariyán ang
dáan-dáang babáe sa Maynilà na ipinag-bíbili sa bálana ang kaniláng
mga katawán at púri úpang magkaroón lang ng maikabubúhay! Nariyán
ang mga táong taga-labás na nanghahárang at pumapatáy ng kapwà úpang
magkaróon lang ng ikabubúhay! Ano pa't lahát ay ginagawâ upang mabúhay
lang! Samakatwíd, lahát ay búhay at búhay ang hánap!

"Ngayon"--at dito'y ipinaglakásan ang salitâ--"Ngayón, anó iyáng
katunggakang ipinipílit mo na katungkúlan ng isáng táo na sagipín ang
napapangánib kahi't na masawî ang kanyáng búhay? Diyáta't lahát na'y
ginagawâ úpang lumawig lang ang búhay at saká ngayo'y ipangangalandákan
mo na di kailangang mamatáy mailigtás lang ang iba?

"Anó ang iyóng mapapalâ sa pagliligtás na iyán?--Aakyât ka ba ng
lángit?

"Oh, áking tinatawánan ang mga isipáng iyán na walâng kaúlo-úlo!

"Isipin mo na lang ang nangyari sa iyo kanína. Magtandâ ka at
madalâ ka na sa napalâ mong iyan sa panghihimások sa di mo dápat
panghimasúkan. Mabúting mabúti na lang at sa bisig ka tinamâan ng
bála... at kung sa tiyán?.... maráhil kung nagkataón, ha! ha! ha! ay
inaagunyás ka na ngayón!"

Napangitî si Gerardo ng isang malungkot na ngitì. Pagkaráan ng ilang
sandalî ay banáyad na sumagót:

"Kung akó man pô ay nagkaduróg-duróg, ang gayón ay waláng kailángan sa
ákin! Hihimláy ako sa libíngan ng walâng pagsisísi, kakaulayáwin ko
roón ang tangi kong Ligáya--ang ligáyang pílit na sasaákin sapagka't
ako'y namatáy sa pagtupád ng aking katungkúlan, sapagka't ako'y
namatáy sa pagpupunyagîng igálang ang watáwat ng wagás at katutúbong
Matwíd! Sa gayón ay di na akó masisísi ng áking Bayan!"...

--"Puff! Mga pangárap!" ang sabád ni Kápitang Memò, at muling
kinamot ang kanyáng tuktók--"mga malíng pangarap! Oh! hanggáng saán
nakikilálang ikáw ay bátà pa nga lang! Hanggáng saán mo ipinakikíta
na walâ kang kamuwâng muwâng sa pamumúhay!... Anó iyáng ligáyang
sinasábi mo? Búnga ng kahibangán! Ibig mo bang iturò ko sa iyó ang
túnay na ligáya--ang ligáyang dápat mong sikápin?"

Itinaás ng nangangáral ang kaliwâ niyang kamay, pinag-abót ang mga
dúlo ng hintuturô at ng hinlalakí, at saka nagpatúloy:

"Ang salapî!! Ang salapî! Kapag ang tao ay mayroong salapi, sa kanya
ay walang hindi maaarì!

"Sa pamamagítan niyán, at niyán lang, makakaránas ka ng tunay
na ligáya; iyán lang ang makapagbibigáy sa iyó ng kariwasáan sa
pamumúhay... Kaya ngâ, wika ko sa iyo, ay huwág mong sayángin
ang iyóng búhay sa mga hibáng na pangárap. Samantalahín mo ang
panahóng itinadhanà ng Diyós para sa iyó dito sa mundó. Hábang
ikáw ay nabubúhay, pues mágpasasà ka sa tamís ng búhay. Iyáng
biyayáng sinasábi mo na dadatíng sa iyo pag ikaw ay nalilibíng na,
ay hindi mo maaasáhan... Mabúti na lang kung ikáw ay papasukín sa
pintô ng lángit, at kung hindi?, at kung doon sa isang pintô ka
mapasuot?... Ha! ha! ha!"

--"Hindi pô ako dapat magtakhá, G. Presidente"--ang saló ng
binata--"hindi pô ako dapat magtakhá sa mga sinasabi ninyo. Ang mga
ganyáng paghahakáng bulok ay palásak na palásak pa ngâ dito sa atin.

"Pára sa mga gaya ninyó, ang búhay ng táo ay dápat gúgulin sa loób
ng isáng palasyong gintô, sa láot ng kariwasáan at lubós na ginháwa.

"Pára sa inyó, ang láyong dápat sikápin ng lahát ay ang makapagtayô
ng mga kamálig ng salapî.

"Ang salapî, sa mga gáya ninyó, ay katumbás ng láhat; salapî ang una,
at salapî ang katapustapúsan; kung walâng salapî ay walâng ligáya.

"Pára sa inyó, ang táo ay dapat tumalíkod sa láhat, dápat isatábi
ang mga katungkúlan, isalímot ang pag-íbig sa báyan, láhì, matwíd, at
karangálan, kung ito ay kakailangánin upang lumági sa pagkamasalapî".

--"Talaga!"--ang sabád ni Kápitang Memò.

--"Ako pô"--ang patuloy ni Gerardo--"ay may ibang paghahakà ukol
sa halagá ng buhay--paghahakang di ko ikamamanghâ kung sakali ma't
inyong tawanan. Sa akin pô, ang buhay na araw at gabi ay ibinababad
sa pulot ng kaginhawahan--ang buhay na walang pinipintuhò kundi ang
Diyos Salapî--ang buhay na walang hanap kundî ang kagalingan ng sarili,
ay isang buhay na mababà, walang halagá, karumaldumal!"....

Tumalikod ang presidente sa binatà at animo'y di nadidinig ang sinasabi
nito. Si Gerardo ay nagpatuloy:

"Ang buhay pô kung ibig magkahalagá, ay kailangang ilaan at gugulin
sa isang adhikang mataas, sa isang láyong marangal... Ang yaman na
kinahahalingán ng boóng Sangdaigdig hálos ay hindî makapagpapadakilà
sa búhay ng táo: maaari siyáng magpaginháwa, magdulot ng kasaganâan
sa lahat ng bágay; dápwa't hindî kasaganâan, hindì kaginhawahan ang
naghahatíd sa táo sa pagkadakilà.

"Ang karunúngan man, líban na lang kung siya'y ginugúgol sa
ikagagalíng ng báyan, lahì, Sangsinúkob, ay dì ko rin masasábing
sapát na makapagpadakilà sa búhay.....

"Ang táo pô, G. Presidente, ay kailángang gumawâ pára sa lahát;
kailangang magbatá ng susón-susóng pagtitiis, dúsa, pighatî, para sa
lahát; kailangang sumagupà sa libo-líbo mang kamatáyan pára sa lahat;
kailángang siyá'y maging isáng taga-hasík ng kalayàan, taga-tagúyod
sa dangál ng tinubúang lupà, taga-kandilì sa púri ng matwíd na malímit
lupígin.......

"Kapág ang isáng táo ay nakasunód sa mga ganyáng katungkúlan, mayáman
man ó mahírap, marúnong man ó hindî, siyá ay may karapatán nang
ipagmalakí ang saríling búhay, at humimláy sa píling ng mga lálong
dakilàng kalulwá sa boong Sangsinúkob!"

Hindi na nakasagót si Kápitang Memò noong sandaling iyón ay siyáng
pagpasok ng tunay na hukóm ng bayán.

Ito ang sa wakás ay sumurì sa naaantalang usapín at pagkatapos na
mádinig ang mga pangangatwíran ng báwa't isa ay inilagdâ ang kanyáng
maayos na hátol.

Si Stag ay nagkamít ng mabigát na parúsa: multá at bilanggô.

Dapwa't, anó pang parusa!

Maánong napanindig ang balahibo ni Stag!

Papaanó'y mayroón siyang isang kristo-krístuhang inaasahan!

Si Kápitang Memò ang nanagót sa multá.

At sa bilanggô?

Aywan pa natin......







VIII

KILABÚTAN KAYÓNG LAHAT!


Pagkaráan ng dalawáng áraw, ang isang malagánap na páhayagáng pilipino
ay kinábasáhan ng mga ganitóng balità:


"MGA PUNONG MAKIKISIG

"Isang amerikanong nagngangálang John Stag na nabilanggô sa báyan ng
Libis, ay nakatákas noóng gabí ng ika 7 ng kasalukúyan. Hanggá ngayon
ay di pa naaaláman kung saan nagtatagò ang umalpás.

"Hindî lang itó ang nangyayári sa Libís. Ang báyang iyán ay isá pa
mandin sa mga matitíbay na kutà at matalinghágang púgad ng Bisyo
sa Pilipinas. Nagkakatusak doon ang nagkikisígang mga sabungán. Sa
báwa't súlok, magíng áraw at magíng gabí, ay may mónte, túpada,
hweteng at kung anóanó pang mga laróng báwal.

"Ang mainam nitó, ay kundî pa dumayo dóon ang mga sekrétang-Maynilà,
ang mga iya'y di matututóp!

"At ang maginoong Presidente? at ang mga pulés?

"Nangaghihilíkan bang lahat."


Ang balítang tumutukoy sa pagtataanán ni Stag ay inámin ni Kápitang
Memò; nguni't lubhâng malakí ang pagkapoót niyá sa tumutúkoy sa sugál
at sábong. Ito'y kanyang tinutulang mahigpít kahimá't di nalilihis
sa katotohánan; datapwa't tútol bibíg lamang naman, pagtutol na kung
kayâ lang ganapin ay pag násasa haráp ng matitinong tao...

Talagáng gayón si Kápitang Memò.

Kaaway kunwâ ng bisyo, dapwa't siya ang nagpalagò sa kanyang bayan
ng sugal at sabong--iyang mga laróng walang tumatangkilik kundi ang
lahat ng mga tamad, ang lahát nang ibig mabuhay nang nakangangá,
ang mga nanghihináyang na gamítin ang útak, magpatulò ng páwis at
batákin ang butó, ang mga ulól at mga duwág na natatákot yumápak sa
mga baitang ng hagdánang matarík na patúngo sa karangálan at katinuán
ng táo sa pamumúhay...

Nguni't hindî ang mahálay na pagkagúmong sa mga hilig na iyang
karápatdápat pakásumpâin, ang siyang tanging maibabalità ng mga
páhayagan tungkól sa báyan ng Libis. Mayroón pang ibá na lalong
mahalagá.

Kung suriìng mabúti ang pamunúan ni Kápitang Memò, ay mapagkikítang
ang mga pangákò nitó sa bayan, mga pangákong sagana sa hángin at
pulótpukyutan, ay untiuntíng nangaunsiyámì. Ang mga tungkúling
mabibigát na ikinápit sa kanyá ng kautusán ay maíngat na iniwásan
hanggáng maaárì. Kung alin yaong kanyang napagtutubúan ng walang págod,
kung alin ang di nararápat gawín ay siyang pinag-ubusan ng kaya.

Sa maiksing sábi, ang pamahaláang umiral ay isáng pamahaláang kailán
ma'y hindî nakasunód sa tunay na niloloób ng bayan, sa itinatadhanà ng
mga utos-pamahaláang waláng nakapangyári kundi ang isáng Kápitang Memò.

Na ito'y di maaarì sapagka't may Konsého Munisipal? Kabulaánan!

Túnay ngâ na ang konsého, sa pagkakinatawán niya ng bayan, ay
di nararápat bumálak ó umáyon sa alin mang bálak na salungát sa
ikagiginháwa ng mga mámamayán; na ang mga konsehal ay kailángang
magpakatalíno, mamuhúnan ng sipag at pagiingat sa paglikhâ ng mga
kautusán; na sila'y dápat gumálang, sumunód at ipagmalasákit ang mga
damdamin at náis ng báyang sa kanila'y naghalál. Tunay ang lahat ng
iyán dapwa't sa kasaliwâang palad ay di siyáng nangyari. Sa loob
ng konsého sa Libis ay dádaladalawá ang mga konsehal na natutong
gumámit ng talíno, dádaladalawá ang nagkaloób na tumútol, at
kailan ma'y di napatangáy sa mga lisya't walang wastông panukala
ni Kápitang Memò. Datapwa't anó ang kaniláng magagawâ sa sila'y
dádaladalawá? ¿Paánong magkakabisà ang matwíd niláng pagtútol sa haráp
ng ánim na kalábang bingí sa sigáw ng Katwíran? Anim na konsehal na
sunudsunúran saan man batákin ni Kápitang Memò; ánim na konsehal na
tuwíng magpupúlong ay harì ng tamád sa pakikitunggalì sa mga bagay
na tumutúkoy sa báyan; anim na konsehal na kung kaya lamang gumising
nang gisíng na gisíng ay kung ang pag-uusápa'y ang pagpapahintúlot
sa malayang pagsambá kay "San Sabong" at "San Sugal", nguni't pag ibá
nang bagay na may kahirápang suriin, ay daig pa ang ipinatdâ ang mga
dilà sa ngalangála!

Iyán ang mga táong may mga matá ay di makakita, may mga taynga ay
di makadiníg. Kapag hiningán ng pasiyá sa isang panukálang binálak
ó inayunan ni Kápitang Memò, siláng lahat ay pawang mga áyon;
nguni't hindi silá sangáyon kapag nákitang iilíng-ilíng ang kanilang
panginóon, ang kanilang Diyos! Maánong magisip-isip; maánong harapín at
kilalanin ang Matwíd!... Oh, alíping asal na ulirán sa kahaláyan! Oh,
mga táong walâng sariling damdámin! Salámat at ang mga konséhong gaya
ng inyóng kinaaníban ay iilán-ilán lamang. At kung hindi, anóng talas
na sandátang makakalaság ng mga káaway ng Pagsasarilíng pinakamimithî
ng Báyan!

Malinaw ngang lumálabas na dahil sa pagkauring busábos ng konsého ay
patúloy pa rin si Kápitang Memò sa kanyáng ugáling paghahariharian;
na dahil din diya'y ang bawa't ibígin niyá, matwid ó baluktot, ay
siyáng nangyári.

Dapwa't salámat at sa mabúting kapaláran ay di na ang lahat doo'y
natutúlog, gaya ng panahóng nagdaan; hindi na ngayón ang lahát ay
kampon nila "Talagá ng Diyos;" hindî na ngayón pawang pipi ang madlâ.

Sa bayang iyon ay mayroón nang naglitaw na ilang káwal ng Bágong
Panahon. Si Gerardo ay isa sa kanila. Sa haráp nang gayong pagdáyà
ng isáng pinunò sa kanyang mga nasasakóp, ay siya ang kaunáunáhang
gumamit ng karapatan; sa kanya unang nádinig ang makapangyaríhang
sigáw ng katwírang niyuyurákan. Si Gerardo ay di nagalinlángan munti
man. Sa isang malaking papúlong ng kanyáng mga kapanálig ay maáyos na
tinuligsâ ang kabulukán ng pamunúan. Bumanggit siyá ng mga nangyári,
inihayág ang mga tiwalîng gawâ ni Kapitang Memò, ang mga palákad
nito na pawàng salungát sa mga kautusán. Ipinakilala niya sa madlâ
ang túnay na Kápitang Memò, isinalaysáy ang boóng kabuháyan nito, na
pinagarálang maíngat ni Gerardo mulâ sa punò hanggáng dulo. Inalaráwan
niyá ang pagkawalâng-káya, ang pagkatamád, ang pagkawalâng-malasákit
sa pinamumunúan, ang pagka-di-dapat na mamunò, ang pagkamagnanákaw,
ang pagkamámamátay--anó pa't sa minsáng sabi, ang boóng lihim at túnay
na kataúhan ni Kápitang Memò, na, sapagka't natutong magbalat kayô,
ay nangingibabaw ngayón sa kanilang lahát.

Upang mapatunáyan ang lahat ng ito, si Gerardo ay nagharáp sa papúlong
na iyón ng maráming saksí. Natatangì sa mga itó ang isang babáeng may
ápat na púng taón na maráhil. Dukhâng-dukhâ ang kanyang pananamit na
bukód sa nanglilimahid na, ay punít punít pa. Sa haráp ng mga táong
doo'y natitípon, ay isinalaysay ng babáeng ito ang napakalungkót
niyáng kabuháyan.

"Bihirà sa inyó"--anyá--"ang di nakakakilála sa ákin. Dapwa't lahát
kayó ay pawàng di nakababatid sa napakaabáng pálad na ikinapadpád ko
sa ganitóng kalagáyan.

"Akó'y inaanák sa isáng malayong bayan--doón sa gitnâ ng lalawígang
Tarlák. Ang áking mga magúlang ay mga táong payapa't mararangál.

"Mayayáman silá, dapwa't noong nangabubúhay, ay mga kaibigang tapát
ng báyang maralitâ.

"Walâ pa akóng sampúng taón nang ako'y maulila sa iná. Palibhasa't
nangamatáy ang lahat ng áking kapatíd, nagtamasá ako ng boong láyaw
at kasaganáan sa piling ni amá.

"Hindî namán ako pángit noóng mga áraw na iyón, kayá't sabihin pa ba,
hindì kakauntî ang mga binátang nagnasang maglingkód sa ákin.

"Dumatíng ang sandalî na ako'y natútong umíbig.

"Dapwa't ¡ay! Pagkatápos na áking maihandóg ang iisa kong pag-irog sa
náhirang ni Bathalang panginoónin niyaring pusò, pagkatápos na áking
maasámasám ang ligáyang pílit kong lalasapín sa kanyáng kandúngan,
ay saka ako sinikíl ng pagkálupítlupít kong kapaláran!.....

"Isáng háting gabí, noong panahón ng paghihimagsik, ako ay nágulangtáng
sa áking pagtúlog. Sa mga únang sandalî, áking hininalang yaon
marahil ay bangúngot lang. Nguni't ¡sa aba ko! Nang mamúlat ang
aking mga matá, nang luminaw ang aking pag-iisip, ay napagmalas kong
yao'y di pala bangúngot kundî isang túnay na kataksilán!... Isang
lílo, isang tampalásan, isang púsong háyop, ang noo'y pumipígil sa
sawîng pálad kong katawan sa pagkagupíling! Ako'y mahinà at siyá
ay malakás! Tinawágan ko ang Diyos; dapwá't ang Diyós na iyón ay
di ako dininig! Ang Diyos na iyón ay di tumúlong! Ako'y nasawî!
¡Nadungisan ang áking puri! Ang háyop ay nagtagumpáy!......

"Nagbangon akó at hinánap ang aking magulang. Pinások ko ang kanyáng
silíd. Dapwa't ¡oh! ¡Mahabagíng Langit! Ang áking pinakaiirog na amá,
ang pinagkakuutángan ko niríng buhay, ang tangi kong kasákasáma araw
at gabí, ay naroon sa kanyáng hígaan, nakababád sa dugô, putól ang úlo!

"Ako'y nálugmok at nawalán ng diwà.

"Nang másaulì ang aking pagkatáo, ako'y nasa saloob ng ibáng bahay.

"Yaon ang tahanan ng tampalasang sumukáb sa aming mag-amá. Ibig
kong tumákas, dapwa't ako'y nakúkulong. Ibig kong magpatiwakál
dapwa't may nakabantay sa akin áraw at gabi. Anó ang minarapat kong
gawín?... Ang Diyós ay di ko na tinawágan! Hindî ko na siya hiningán
ng abuloy!... Ako'y nádalâ na!... Walâ akong túlong na inaasáhan noón
kundî ang kabayanihan ng kasumpàan ko sa pag-irog. Dapwa't ¡ay! si
Fidél na aking minahál higit sa buhay, ay hindi ko na nákita hanggáng
sa sandalíng ito! Siyá man yata'y tinikís na ang magwaláng bahalà sa
aking pagtángis! Siyá man yata'y nawalán din ng habág sa mapait na
pagdadalamhatì niyaring kálulwa!...

"Sa haráp ng mga ganitóng kalagáyan anó pa ang sa áki'y nalalabing
gawin? Walâ nang iba kundî ang makibágay sa áking pálad. Yaring pusò
ay dahandáhang tumigás, untîuntîng nasabík sa kaputíkan, untîuntîng
natútong umíbig sa isáng lilo, sa pumatáy sa ákin ding amá!

"Malaon din na kami'y nagsáma ng tampalásan.

"Datapwa't pagkatápos na masalantâ niya ang áking katawán, pagkatápos
na mabusog sa akin ang kanyáng kahayúpan, pagkatápos na makapagpasasà
sa aking lamán, ang ganid na iyon ay di na nakitungo sa akin; ginútom
na ako, ipinagbilí ang mahuhúsay kong damit, binawì ang mga aláhas na
bigay niyá sa akin, at di nagkásiya sa ganitó, akó'y ipinagtulákan sa
kusinà ng báhay upang doon gumawâ, doon kumain, at matúlog sa ibabaw
ng mga panggátong na kahoy, kahalubilo ng mga pusa't áso! Sa minsán
sabi, ginawâ akong isang alípin, isang busabos!

"Ganitó ang áking lagáy ng kami ay málipat sa báyang ito.

"Pagdatíng na pagdatíng namin, ako'y sinumbatán ng tampalásan kong
panginóon. Ipapapatáy daw niyá ako kapag di ko iningátan ang líhim
ng pagkasawî naming mag-amá.

"Sapagka't púsong-babáe, ako'y malaong nadalá ng tákot at kahinàan:
iningátan ko ngâ ang lihim.

"Dapwa't ngayón, ngayón ay sumápit na ang sandalî na sa láot ng aking
pagkaabâ ay di na akó napangingilábot ng kamatáyan; ang kahináan ay
walâ na sa ákin!... Tuparín kung ibig ng panginóon ko ang kanyang
sumbát!... Ang kanyáng líhim ay nasisiwalat na!...

"Nguni't, bágo ko wakasán ang áking salitâ, ay ipahintulot na aking
maitanóng:

"Alám ba ninyó, mga táong báyan, alam ba ninyó kung síno ang
napakabúti kong panginóong iyan, kung sino ang tumaksíl sa kaawà-awà
kong magúlang, nagnákaw sa puri ko't dangál at nagbulíd sa akin sa
bangín ng pagkabusábos?

"¡¡Kilabútan kayóng lahat, oh mga taong walâng málay!!...

"Siyá ay yaong sa inyó ngayo'y namumunò ang pinagkatiwaláan ninyo ng
mga kautusán, dangál at kabuháyan ng isang bayan!!..."

Ang mga pinagtahî-tahî at pinagarálang kabulaánan, ay madalíng
makikilala ng isang maálam magmasíd. Nguni't sa kabuhayang
isinalaysáy ng babáeng iyón, ay walâng nakádama nang kahi't gabáhid
na kasinungalingan.

Bawa't anyô ng kanyáng mukhâ, bawa't galáw ng mga matá, bawa't
salitâ ng maáyos niyang salaysáy, ay isang taták ng katotohánan,
isang matibay na panghikayat sa lálong dì mapaniwalaing kálulwa.

Kaya't napangilabot ngâ ng babáeng iyón ang madlâng sa kanya'y
nakikinig!...

Nang sa wakás ay imungkáhì ni Gerardo ang paghingi kay Kápitang Memò
na magbitiw ng tungkól, lahát ng nangaróon ay kumatig sa kanya; lahat,
hanggáng ang mga dating kapanalig ni Kápitang Memò, ay naniwalang
sila'y nálinlang. Gayón na lang ang kanilang pagsisísi!







IX

KAY SAMÂNG PAGKAKÁTAON!


Nang matápos ang papúlong, si Gerardo ay nilapítan ng isang pulís.

--"Ipinatatáwag pô kayó ng presidente".

--"Saan siya nároon?"

--"Sa báhay-pamunúan pô".

Noon di'y lumákad si Gerardo. Dinatnáng bukás ang tanggápan ni Kápitang
Memò, kaya't agád siyang pumások. Masiglang binati ang dinatnan:

--"Magandáng araw pô!"

Ang binatì ay walang itinugón kundî isang tingíng nagbabága sa poot.

--"Ginoó, ako nga pô ba'y inyong ipinasusundô?"--ang pabulalás na
tanong ng binatà.

Bigláng nagtindíg ang mabangís na Kápitan at nang másulyapan ang
nakangangáng pintô, ay nilapítan ito at inalápat sa pamamagitan
ng isang síkad. Kumalabóg ang pintô na ikinabuláhaw ng boong
báhay. Pagkatápos ay sinúgod si Gerardo at nagngingitngit na tumanóng:

--"Anó ang sumúot sa walang hiyâ mong úlo at nakaisip kang gumawâ ng
ganitong kaululán?"

--"Kaululán? Anó pong kaululán?... Aling gawâ ko ang inyóng tinutúkoy?"

Tumalikod si Kápitang Memò at pagkatápos na maibalabág sa sahíg ang
tangang aklát ay iingos-ingos na sumagot:

--"Pshe! Magmámaangmaángan ka pa!"

--"Kápitang Memò,"--ang paklí ng binatà--"dí ko kayo maunawàan. Ang
tinutúkoy ba ninyó ay ang pagmumungkáhi ko sa áking mga kapanálig
na kayo'y pagbitiwín ng tungkól sapagka't di kayó tumutupád sa mga
itinatadhanà ng mga kautusang isinumpâ ninyóng tutuparin? Kung iyán
ang tinatáwag ninyóng kaululán, kayó po'y namamalî!"

--"At anó ang mayroon sa iyó kung di ko man tinútupad ang aking
sumpâ? Sino ka bang makikialám sa akin? Bákit mo imumungkahing alisán
ako ng tungkól?"

--"Ah, sapagká't kayó ay di nararápat mamunò!"--ang maliksíng tugón
ng binatà na ikinasúgod muli sa kanyá ni Kápitang Memò.

Ang dágok na iyón ay lubhâng malakás.

--"Nápakalabis kang totóo!"--ang ngitngit ng nandididilát--"walâ ka
nang kagálanggálang sa iyóng kaúsap! Nawalán ka na ba ng pag-iisip
at nalimutan mo na kung sino akó, akó na iyóng kaharáp?"

--"Hindî pô akó nakalilímot: kayó po'y isang hámak na táong gaya
ko rin, na sa kasamáang palad ng bayang itó, ay náhalal na magpunò
sa kanyá."

--"Ah!" ang sambót ni Kápitang Memò--"kinikilála mo palá akóng pinunóng
ínahalál, ay bákit at ganyán kung ikaw'y mangusap sa áking haráp? Bakit
áyaw mo akóng igálang?"

--"Sapagka pô't hindî kailángan!"

--"Hindî kailángan? Híndî kailángang igálang mo akó, akó na iyóng
pinunò? Nauulól ka na ba?"

--"Námamali pô kayó"--ang tugon ni Gerardo--"ang isáng pinunò na
dumadayà sa kanyáng bayan sa pamamagítan ng mga pangakong di tinutupad,
nagaákay sa mga nasasakop sa mahahálay na hílig at ásal--ang isáng
pinunò na kinatátatakán sa nóo ng taták ng mga magnanákaw at mamamátay
ng kapwà--ang pinúnong ganyán ay hindî dapat kaalang-alangánan ng
mga táong matitinô!"

--"Waláng hiyâ!!... At ang mga bintáng bang iyán ang ipararátang mo
sa ákin? At ang isáng musmós na gáya mo ang mangangahás?"

--"Oo pô, akó!"

--"Diyáta't ikáw ang mangangahás? ikáw? ikáw? ikáw?"

Nilundág ni Kápitang Memò ang isáng talibóng na nakasabit sa dingdíng.

Sa sumunód na sandalî, nang silá ay nagkakasunggában na, ay siyáng
pagbuká ng pintóng nakalapat. Sumungaw ang isang kalbóng tuktók,
isang mukhâng nagkakangngingiwì, at isáng tiyáng matabâ.

Si Kápitang Memò ay párang tinamáan ng kulóg, kundî man parang isáng
batà na nakakita ng nunò....

Nguni't, sino ang nunòng ito?

¿Sino ang naghihintáy?... Siya ang mapaglagalág sa automobil, ang
mapagamá-amáhan, ang kataástaásang punò sa Sangkapulúan, na kung
bakit sa kanyáng pagdálaw kay Kápitang Memò, ay tinaón yátang talagá
ang pangyayáring iyón!



Si Gerardo ay nasugátan na namán.

Si Kápitang Memò, ay animo'y kinakalambre. Papaáno ang pakikiharáp
niyáng gagawin sa kanyáng punò? Kay lakí ngâ namáng kahihíyan nitó!

Isáng mahigpít na paguúsig ng Gobernador ang sumunód. Inahayág sa
kanyá ni Gerardo ang hangad ng báyan na pinagkáisahán sa papúlong na
idináos sa umága ng araw na iyón.

Noón di'y nátiwalag sa katungkúlan si Kápitang Memò. Walâng imík
na tinanggáp niyá ang gayóng pagkápahámak sa matá ng madlâ; dapwa't
oh! ang kanyáng póot!....

Siya'y umuwî na anaki'y isáng ulól. Ang kanyáng báhay, at báwa't
sangá, báwa't dáhon, báwa't bunga ng kanyáng mga haláman, wári baga'y
ipinagsisigáwan sa kanyá ang mga salitáng "MAGHIGANTI KA, O KUN HINDI,
IKAW AY DUWAG!"....







X

SI ELÍNG


Itó ang ngalan ng dalágang anák ni Julio. Magíng sa gandá, at magíng sa
katalinuhan man, si Elíng ay hindî maitatánging lubós sa mga bulaklák
ng kanyáng bayán.

Ang hiwágà, ang líhim ng kanyáng pagkamapanghalína ng--kanyáng
makapangyaríhang pagkamapanghalína--ay di nátin masusumpungán sa
dilág ng mukhâ, ni sa ningníng ng kanyáng útak, hindî.

Ang hiwagà at lihim na iyón, upáng mádamá, ay kailángang makipagkilála
kay Elíng; kailángang kaulayáwin siyá nang maláon; kailángang táwagan
ang kanyáng pusò; tarukín ang pagkamababà, ang pagkamasunúrin,
ang pagkagintô ng kanyáng loób; kailángang titígan ang mga títig
ni Elíng, ang mga títig niyáng nagpapakilála sa isáng kalulwáng
malambíng at mapangambáhin, isáng kalulwáng masintáhin at mahabagín,
isáng kalulwáng puspós ng línis, ng gandá at kahinhinán.

Náriyan ang líhim, ang hiwagàng bumibílot sa kataúhan ni Elíng. Náriyan
ang talàng nákikintál sa maalindóg niyáng noó. Náriyan ang kayamánang
maipagmámalakí ng kanyáng kadukhâan.

Si Elíng, mulâ sa pagkabatà, ay mahiligín sa pagaáral. Marúnong ng
kastilà, gayón din ng ingglés. Isang taón na siyá'y nagtirá sa Colegio
de Sta. Isabel, at dalawáng taón namán sa Dormitory School. Díto sa
hulí, siya ay nag-áral ng Nursing, ang mahúsay at tumpák na pagaalága
sa may sakít. Panggagáling sa Dormitory, siya'y tumirá sa Hospital
de San Pablo úpang isagawâ doon ang kanyáng napagarálan. May iláng
buwan din ang kanyáng nagúgol sa pagsasánay na ito, sa píling ng mga
amerikánang enfermera.

Nguni't hwág isiksík sa guniguní ng bumabása ang hinalà, na, sapagka't
naturang taga dormitory, at sapagka't maláong nákahalubílo ng mga
amerikana, si Elíng marahil ay pinanáwan na ng mga katutúbong kílos,
at mga katutúbong ugalì sa pananamít at pakikipagkápwà.

Hindi gumawî nang ganyán ang binibining itó; hindî siya pumapára sa
mga nagsalasalambáy diyáng miss, na di na nangíming ipailalim ang
pagka-pilipína sa kanilang pagaaméamerikanahan di lang sa gayák,
di lang sa kilos, kundí ang lalong kasákitsákit at kahináhináyang ay
patí ang budhi, ang kalulwa't mga paghakaka ay pinipilit na igáya't
ipabusabos sa mga dayuhang iyán.... na siyáng nagnákaw sa kalayáan ng
kaniláng báyan at untî-untîng humihigpít sa tanikaláng madalî ó malaon
ay siyáng ikabubulusók ng Kapilipinuhan sa bangín ng pagka-aba!...

Nasusuklám si Elíng sa mga bágay na ito, kaya't mahigpít na iniingátan
ang pagka-pilipína. Tandâ ng pag-iingat niyang iyan at paglayò niya
sa mga ugaling dáyo, ang kanyáng madalás na dî pagpanáog sa kaniláng
tindáhan, kapag ang dumudulóg doon ay mga amerikánong magagasláw. Ugali
ito ni Elíng, hindî sapagka't binubulag siya ng "prejuicio de raza"
(alalaong baga'y ang pagtingin sa kúlay ng balát at di sa kataúhan
ng isang táo,) kundî sapagka't ang kanyáng kahinhinán ay hindî
makababatáng malásin ang magagaspáng at mahahálay na kilos na
karaniwáng gawiîn dito ng di iilang amerikáno.

Si Elíng ngâ ay hindî kapára ng mga ibang dalaginding diyán,
na, pagkagát na nang dilím, ay nagpupuláhan ng damít sa loob ng
kanikaniláng kantina, nagkakapálan ng palábok sa mukhâ, nagdadamihan
at nagpapalalúan ng urì ng mga mister na sa kanila'y nakalilígid,
na anáki'y mga ásong kakáwkáw-káwkáw, aamóy amóy at didilà-dilà....

Si Elíng ay poót na poót sa mga asal na iyáng lubhâ nga namáng
nakaririmárim. Minsan siyáng manginíg sa gálit at minsáng mápaiyak
sa habág sa mga kadalága niyang halíng na halíng sa ganganyáng gawâ,
na kadalasán at sa tuwírang sabi, ay lumalabás na isáng malinaw na
pagtitindá ng dangál at púri!

Magsábi, kung hindî, iyáng mga kinasasadlakán ngayón ng pulà ng bálana.

Magsábi, iyáng mga nakátikim ng buhay-kantinéra sa áting mga
bayánbayán.

Ilán na sa kanilá, ang úpang mapawili lang sa tindahan ang isáng
amerikánong manglalásing, ay tutulútan nang sila'y kutyâ-kutyâin nitó
sa likód ng mga salitang "Sweetheart, give me a kiss!"?

Ilán na sa kanilá ang natulúyan na ngang mahagkán ng mga langó?

Ilán na sa kanilá ang ngayo'y kinikilabútan sa hiyâ sa ibang táo,
sapagka't sa ganitó ó gayóng gabí, silá ay náyapus ng mga ganitó ó
gayóng négro?

At humahanggá ba rito ang mga nangyayári?

Bakit at may mga kantinera diyang ngayo'y kaabra-abrasete ó kaya'y
kalúlan sa bagól ng mga itim? Maaáring, sapagká't narahiyô sa pilak ng
mga ito; dapwa't kadalasá'y sapagka't sa ganito ó gayong pagkakátaon
sa loob ng kantina, ay may isang milagrong nangyari!...

Mga sawîng pálad!...

May katwirang lumuhà ang isang Elíng dahil sa inyó!







XI

"ANÓ SABI IYÓN EH?"


Si Gerardo ay hindî santó. Anák din siyá ni Eva't ni Adán na kapwà
makasalánan.

Totóo ngâ na, para kay Gerardo, Báyan ang una at Báyan ang hulí; na,
ang pagkamakabáyan, hindî sa salita kundî sa gawâ, ay siyang damdaming
pinakamahalagá at nangangaibábaw sa boô niyang kataúhan. Totóo rin
namán na walâ siyang pinakamamahál na pangarap mulâ sa pagkabatà
kundî ang maihandóg ang iisa niyáng pusò sa dámbanà ng kanyáng lahì.

Dapwa't hindî dahil sa lahát nang itó, ay walâ nang maiisip si Gerardo
sa boô niyang búhay kundî "bayan." Maminsánminsán din namang masubukan
niyá ang kanyang sarili na nangangarap hindî sa kandúngan ng báyan,
kundî sa kandungan niyáng mga anáki'y tálàng nagantiantilaw sa lángit
ng Pilipinas... Katakátaká kayâ na ang Gerardong iyan ay maakit sa
bangóng humáhalimúyak ng isáng sampagitang nananariwà na gáya ni Elíng?

Oh, si Elíng!

Sa kanyáng hárap si Gerardo ay nagíging makátà, nagíging mangangarap,
at magiliwin sa mga bulaklák, paró-paró, tala, bítuin...

Ang mabaít niyáng pusò sa haráp ni Elíng ay kung bákit nagíging
manunuksó; ang mga payapa't maaamò niyáng sulyáp ay kung bákit nagíging
malilikot at mga magnanakaw!...

Silang dalawá ay malaon nang magkaibígan. Hábang lumaláon ang kanilang
pagkikilála, ay lalo at lálong nasasabík si Gerardo sa pagmalas sa
dilág ni Elíng, sa pagdiníg sa mga mahihiwagà't matatamís niyáng
salitâ, sa pagpúkaw sa mga ngiting mangbibíhag ng binibining yaon na
ipinaglihí yatà sa dako pa roon ng hinhín ni María Clara...

Nguni't hanggán diyán lang si Gerardo.

Hinahangaan niya ang ganda ni Elíng, dapwa't di pa sumasambá.

Siya lang ay natutuwâ, naiigáyang malásin ang himalâng yaon ng
Kalikasán.



Noong mangyari ang sigalót sa bahay-pamunùan, si Elíng ay nakaupô at
nanánahí ng isang panyô sa loob ng kanyáng tindáhan. Ang mukhâ niyáng
kaáya-áya, ay minsáng magníngning sa lugód, at minsáng mangulimlím sa
panglaw. Bakit? Ang kanyáng paningín ay láging nakapakò sa malayò,
bihírang mátigil sa tinatahî. Báwa't táong magdáan ay kinikilalang
mabúti malayò pa.

Si Elíng ay may ináantabayánan; hinihintáy niya ang pagdáan sa kanyáng
tapát noong mainit sa sínag ng Bagong Araw na kabatang-batà pa ay
bayani na. Para kay Elíng, ang binátang yaon na láging nahahandáng
ipáram ang lahat maitaguyod lang ang dinuduháging Matwíd, ang binátang
yaon na nagsanggálang sa dangál ni Julio na kanyáng amá, ay isa
nang Krísto na dápat niyáng igálang, mahalín, itángi, pagukúlan ng
báwa't paták ng kanyáng pagíbig, at paghandugán ng báwa't tibók ng
kanyáng pusò!



Hindî nainíp si Elíng sa pagaantáy kay Gerardo, na sínapantahà niyáng
sa paguwî mulâ sa presidencia ay dadáan sa tapát ng kanyáng tindáhan.

Malayo pa ay nakilála na ng binibini ang magílas na tindíg nang líhim
niyang kinakauláyaw sa kaibutúran ng kanyáng pusò.

--"Elíng!"--ang pagdaka'y ibinati ng binatà pagkalapít sa tindáhan.

--"Gerardo, halika sandalî!"

Si Gerardo'y lumapit at boong galak na kinamayan ang binibini na
noo'y singpulá ng gumámela, aywán kung dáhil sa pagaálaalang siya'y
lumábis sa kanyáng nápakalambíng na "Halíka!"

--"Ipagpatáwad mo, Elíng, ang pakikikamáy ko sa iyó ng kaliwâ."

--"Bákit? anóng mayroón ka sa iyóng kánan?"

Si Gerardo'y nagkúlay sagà.

Inakalà niya na isáng pagbubunyî sa saríli kung ipagtátapát ang
tunay na dáhil; kaya't ngumitì na lang at nasiyahan sa ísang
maráhang:--"Walâ!"

--"O, ay bákit at may tálì?"

--"Walâng ano man; nákagat lang akó ng putakté doon áh... sa púnong
bayábas nina Tikikò."

Si Elíng ay alangáng mapangitíng alangáng magálit. Alam niyá, gáya ng
pagkaálam sa kanyáng A. B. K,... na ang mga salitâng iyon ay isang
kimpál na kabulaánan. Hinagisan muna ang binatà ng isang tingin na
wari'y nagsísisigáw ng "Sinungaling itó ah!," bágo sumagót:

--"Putakté? ay bákit at may dugô?"

Si Gerardo'y lálong namulá.

--"Diyatà, Gerardo,"--ang dugtong ni Elena--"diyatà namá't iyán lang
ay ipagkákailâ mo pa sa akin?... Sapagka ba namá't ang tumátanong
ay...ah! siya nga palâ naman!... Isáng walâng kabuluháng gáya ko,
ay di ngâ nararápat..."

Ang binatang tigagál na tigagál sa mga salitâ ng kanyáng kaharáp,
ay walâng naihumá kundî isáng:--"Hindîng hindî, Elíng, oh, hindî ngâ!"

--"Súlong na, maaabála ka lang sa akin,"--ang patúloy ng binibinì na
may kahálong wari'y hinampó.

--"Patáwad, Elíng!... Binibirò lang kita.... Huwág mong damdamín ang
áking pagkukúlang... at sasabíhin ko na sa iyóng lahat!"

Isang ngitî, isang ngiting malambíng na 'kapilas ng langit' ang
nagpahiwátig kay Gerardo na ang pinangambahán niyang nagtampó ngang
túnay, ay nagtamputampúhan palâ lang.

--"Anó iyon? Sabihin mo na."

--"Isa lang muntíng súgat, Elíng."

--"Na namán!"--ang may padaóp kamáy pang sagót ng dalága, na animo'y
noon lang nabatíd ang nangyári kay Gerardo, gayóng sa katunáyan ay
nagmamaángmaángan siya.

Pagdaka'y  kumúha ng isáng palanggána, isáng boteng may lamáng gamot
at saka isáng kahitang punô ng búlak at pangtalì ng súgat.

--"Gerardo"--ang bigkás ng binibinì;--"nakatupad ka na ng iyong
katungkúlan; bayaan mo namang tuparín ko ang ákin. Lilinisin ko ang
iyóng súgat."

--"Oh Elíng! Kay gandá ng iyong loób!... Dápwa't ikáw, mutyâ ng áking
báyan, linisin ang súgat ng isáng abâng dukhâ na gaya ko?..."

--"Kung anó-anó ang pinagsasabi ng Gerardong itó!"--ang tugón ng
dalága pagkatápos na máhagisan ang kaúsap ng isang napakalagkit na
títig.--"Tingnán ko nga ang iyóng kamay."--At umakmang aabutin ang
sugatáng kamay ni Gerardo na dalidali nitóng inaurong.

--"Huwag na, Elíng; maráming salamat."

--"O tingnán mo siyá!"

--"Hindî nábabagay. Bayáan mo ná't..."

--"Bayáang anó? hindi ba't tuwî kang magtatalumpatì ay
ipinangangaral mo na ang lahát ng táo ay dápat tumupád sa kanikaniláng
katungkúlan? Hindî ba't ito'y katungkúlan ko? Ako ba'y hindî táo sa
iyo? Hindî ba...."

--"Súkat na, Elíng, súkat na; dapwa't iyang mga sutlâ mong dalirì ay
di dapat marumhán ng...."

--"Diyatà nama't akó'y iyóng bibiguín?"

--"Oh! Hindî sa ibig kitáng biguín..."

--"Ah, ayóko ngâ nang maraming salitâ. Ipalínis mo sa akin ang iyong
súgat at tapús!"

Si Gerardo'y di na tumutol sa pagaala-álang baká ang ánghel na iyón
ay magtampó na namán.

Samantálang hinuhugásan ng binibinì ang kamáy ng binatà, itó nama'y
walang tahán ng panunuksó:

--"Oh Elíng! Sa pinakamalálim kong mga pangarap, sa pinakamaláyang
galáw ng aking gunitâ, kailán ma'y di ko nasumpungán ang anó mang
pahiwátig na sa áraw na itó ay áking mapapaláran ang pagkakáwang-gawâ
niyáng mga dalirì mong bawa't isá ay katumbás ng boô kong buhay!"

--"Palalò!"

--"Elíng, kaúsap mo yaring pusò!"

--"Sinungáling!"

--"Elíng, dinggín mo ang isáng katotohánan!"

--"Anó iyón?"

--"Isáng damdaming iniingat-ingátan ko at maláon ng tinitimpî-timpî?"

--"Sabíhin mo kung anó."

--"Huwág kang magagálit?"

--"Bakit kayâ akó magagálit?"

--"Tatanggapín mo?"

--"Anó sabi iyón eh?"

--"Ipangakò mo muna!"....

--"Na anó?"

--"Na iyong tatanggapín!"

--"Kung hindì masamâ'y... tatanggapín ko."

--"Elíng, iniíbig kita!"

--"Ha?"--ang pamangháng saló ng angkán ni Venus.

--"Iniíbig kitá!"...

--"Dáhan-dáhan, Gerardo! Ikáw ay magmunimuni."

--"Walang kailángan, kita'y kilaláng malaon na... Ako rin nama'y
kilalá mo: sumagot ka. Elíng, iniíbig mo ba akó?"

--"Ay! ang pusò ko, Gerardo, ay di na akin; kinusà ko siyang ihandóg
sa dápat kong mahalin; lumingap sa ibá ay di na mangyayári!"

Ang binata'y sandalîng napípi. Kinintalán ng isang títig ang bitúing
kauláyaw bago tumugón:--

--"Elíng, di ko mawatásan ang iyóng salitâ. Ibig mo bagáng sabihin
na ako'y walâ nang pag-asa?"

--". . . . . . ."

--"Iyon ba ang kahulugan?"

--"Aywán ko."

--"Aywán ko dáw!"

--"Abá!"

--"Wikà mo'y di na mangyayáring lumingap ka pa sa ibá? Anó ang
kahulugán at kangino tumutúkoy ang ibang iyan? Sa ákin kayâ, Elíng?"

--"Aywán ko!"

--"Si Elíng namán! Bákit mo kayâ pinamamáhay ang kalulwá ko sa
pangangambá?... Sagutín mo sana akó. Sa akin ba tumutúkoy?"

--"Hindî...."--ang wari'y walâ sa loob na sagót ng binibinì.

--"Oh, Elíng ko! At ang ibig mong sabíhin ay di ka na makalilíngap
kanino pa man, líban sa ákin?"

Isáng busilak na langit ang nabuksán kay Gerardo. Pagdaka'y hinawakan
ang kamay ni Elena at inalapit sa lumulundag niyang pusò.

--"Abá! hindî!... aywán ko! hindî!... abá!"--ang sunod-sunod na
pagbabangong-puri ng dalagang nagpúpumiglás.

--"Ah, Elíng! Huwág mo nang ikaít sa akin ang tibók niyáng iyong
pusò. Ipagtapát mo na! Hindî mo ba ako iniíbig, Elíng?"

Iláng sandalî na napipi ang binibinì. Walang maláang
isagót. Kundanga'y napasukol siyá kaagad! Gayón na lang ang kanyáng
pagsisisi. Manganí-nganíng kagatin ang tuksóng dilà na sa pamamagítan
ng isang "Hindî", ay isiniwálat ang boông líhim ng kanyáng pusò!

--"Elíng ko",--ang mulìng samô ng binatà. "Hindî mo ba ako iniíbig?"

Kálulwá na ni Elíng ang tumugón:--

--"Oo, Gerardo, oo iniíbig kitá!!"

Pangahas na laláki! Isáng matindíng halík at isang mahigpít na yákap
ang pagdáka'y ninákaw sa bulaklák na yaon ng Kasilangánan.

Mabuti na lang at wala silang saksi!



Si Gerardo'y umuwî noon na taglay ang dalawâng pagwawagíng magkaibá
ng urì: Tagumpay lában sa kasikismo ng isang pinunò at tagumpay lában
sa pulutóng ng mga naggigilásang kandidato sa kamáy ni Elíng.







XII

...AT ANG JUSTICÍA?


Kulóng na kulóng sa kanyáng silíd.

Walâng humpáy nang kayayao't dito. Nakayayaníg sa boóng báhay ang
madadalás niyáng yabág na ipinagdidiínan sa sahíg na tablá. Ang mga
lagutók ng kanyáng mga abellanang sapátos na nanggigipalpál sa putik
ay nakabubulahaw hanggang sa mga nagtutulúgang kápitbahay--hanggáng
sa mga manók na namamahingá sa isáng púnong kamatsiléng nakatánod
sa trangkahan. Ang mga bintî at bisig ay pára-parang naninigás;
ang mga dalirì ay tikóm na tikóm, na animó'y may isang sasagupáing
kalában. Minsán baltakín nang paibabâ ang kamiseta niyang putê na pigtâ
ng pawis; minsáng pag-itíngan nang higpit ang bigkís na nakakabít sa
pantalong kake na dahandáhang dumádausdós sa kaluwángan ng baywang.

Walâng pumupúlas sa nakángiwî niyang mga labì kundi
páwang pagngingitngít, pawang buntóng-hiningá, pawang mga
"huhm! hm! huhm! hm!"

Walâng anó-anó'y lumapit sa isáng mésa at umupô; pinagábot ang mga
kílay na pumapalamúti sa mga naglalalimang matá na nagpapahiwátig ng
tatlóng gabíng di pagkatulóg; sinabunot ang mga mapuputê niyang buhók;
tiningalâ ang isáng laráwang nakasábit sa dinding; kinagát ang labì,
nagbuntóng-hiningá, sumuntók ng boông diín, pumadyák, tumindíg at
nagyáot dito na naman.

--"Hu hm! hm! hm!"--ang mulî niyang ngitngit--"Papatayín ko! papatayín
ko! hu! hm! hu! hm!... Noóng áraw, noóng áraw ¡hu hm!... akó ang harì
sa báyang itó, óo harì! harì!... Sa áking haráp lahat ay nanunuyò,
lahát ay lumuluhód, lahát ay "óo pô" sa ákin, walâng "hindî"
ni "ayóko"! Noóng araw, ¡hu hm!... ako'y isáng don, isáng mahal na
máginoo sa matá ng madlâ.... ¡hu hm! Lahat ay naniwalà na ako'y mayáman
sa lahat; na ang yáman ko ay áking nakamtán sa tulò ng sarili kong
páwis! ¡hu hm!.... Lahát ay naniwalà na malinis yaring budhî ¡hu hm!...

"Ang mga lihim na pinakatagòtagò kong mahigpit, noon ay walâ kundî
akóng akó lang ang nakababatíd! ¡Hu hm!...

"Nguni't ngayón! ngayón! oh ngayón! ¡hu hm!... Sa ákin, ay walâng
di umiiring, walâng dî kumukutyâ, walang dî lumilibák, bawa't matá
ay násusuklám sa kataúhan ko, bawa't dilà ay ako ang isinusumpâ,
bawa't dalirì ay sa ákin nakaturò--sa akin na kung tawágin ngayón
ay di na "ang kapitan" "ang presidente;" kundì ang magnanakaw, ang
magdaraya, ang mámamátay! ¡Hu hu! hu hm!... At bákit ako'y nagkaganitó
ngayón? Bakit ako ngayo'y hámak na hámak, dustâng dustâ, mababang
mababà? Sino, sino ang gumanitó sa ákin?... ¡Hu hu! hm!

"Oh! Pagpápapatayín ko ang mga iyán!...

"Oh Gerardo! Oh Rustica! Magsipagtagò na kayó, mga
walânghiyâ!... Sáyang ang áking pagkamámamátay kapág kayo'y pinatáwad
ng aking patalím! !Hu hm!!"

At lálong dinalasán ang hakbáng, lalong ipinagdiínan ang yabág. Walâng
anó-anó'y bigláng tumígil.

--"Dapwa't... ako'y pápatay?"--ang kanyang patuloy.--"Diyata't
pápatáy na namán akó?... Iba na ngayón ang pamahalàan!... Hindi
na itó panahón ng kastilà! Diyata't pápatáy na namán ako?... At ang
Justicia? ang Justicia?"--At muling nag yáo't dito ang mistúlang ulól;
at sa kátatanong ng "ang Justicia?" ay naala-ala tuloy ang pagtatálo
ng isang huklubáng pederál at isang binatàng independista.

--"Justicia?"--anitóng huli sa pagtatalong nábanggit.--"Sa ating
Bayan ay walâ pang Justicia! Ni noóng panahón ng kastilà, ni sa mga
sandalîng itó ay walang taál at wagás na Justiciang umíral ó umiíral
dito. Ang dito'y tinatawag na Justicia, ay Justiciang kábilanin: Ang
isa niyang matá ay dilát, dapwa't ang isa ay bulág. Yaong úna ay siyang
ginagámit kapag ang dapat tangkilikin sa isang usapin ay amerikáno
laban sa pilipino. Kapag ang dapat tangkilikin ay pilipino laban sa
amerikáno, ang malimit hingan ng pasiyá ay ang matáng bulág!... Ayaw
kayóng maniwalà?... Ibig ninyóng patunáyan ko ang pagkakábilanin
ng tinatawag na Justicia ng kasalukúyang pamahalaan?... Náriyan
ang huling pagkakabilanggô ni Dr. Gómez. Bákit siya hinatulang
mabilibid?... Tanungin ang Kagálanggálang na hukóm na humátol sa kanyá,
at sarì-sarìng kuskósbalúngos ang imamatwid, dapwa't sumanggunì kayo sa
isáng malayàng pagíisip na walâng kinikilingan, at inyóng mababatid na
ang tunay at tánging dahil ng pagkabilanggô ni Dr. Gómez, ay sapagka't
si Dr. Gómez, na isang pilipino, ay iminungkahing magsiaklás ang
mga manggawà, na mga pilipino din, sa isang Samahan ng mga puhúnang
amerikano!... Iyán ba ang tinatáwag na Justicia?...

"At Justicia bagá ang naguudyók sa pamahalaang iyán na kupkupín at
panatilihin sa kanyáng tungkól ang isang "Ibong Mangdaragit," na upang
lálo't lálong makapagsamantalá at magtubò sa kanyáng kapangyaríhan,
ay nanghihimások sa di dapat panghimasúkan, nagpapasasà nang lihim
sa yáman ng may yáman at umaangkín sa arì ng may arì?...... Anóng
Justicia iyán?

"At anóng Justicia iyán na pumapatnúbay dito sa bawa't hakbáng
ng pamunúang amerikáno?..... Justicia ba ang sakúpin ang áyaw
pasakóp? ¿pagharìan ang ayaw paharì kaníno pa man, tangi na lang sa
sariling loob?... Justicia ba ang di pagtupád ng pamahaláan sa kanyang
pangakò sa pinamumunúan? Di ba't nangakò ang pamahaláang iyán na
palalayàin ang ating Bayan? Anó ang ginagawâ niya ngayón? Ipinagbabáwal
ang ating Bandilà; pinanánatíli ang pagkakatangìtangì; hinahámak
ang pagkakapantáypantáy ng amerikáno at pilipino; ipinagbabáwal sa
kabatàan ang kumatig sa Pagsasarilí; tinatawánan, tinatáwag na ulól
ang Báyang ito tuwing magbubukás ng dibdib, tuwing ipagtatapát ang
kanyáng pinakadalisay na damdámin, ang wagás at katutubong pag-írog
sa isáng malayang búhay--pag-irog na dî magmamáliw ni matitinag sa
kanyang pusò, bumagsák man ang líbolíbong unós at buhawi!....

"At humahanggá ba rito ang mga matalinghágang panukalà na isinasagawâ
ng Pamunúang amerikáno sa Pilipinas?... At ang Bill Payne? Ang
Bill Payne na madalî ó maláon, kapag nagkataón, ay magiging isa
nang makapangyaríhang utos na kailángan yukûan at sundín ng Bayang
Pilipino? Ah, ang Bill Payne! Iyan ang pinakatúso at pinakadakilà sa
lahát ng mga binalak na kautusán ng Pamunúan! Tagláy ng Bill Payne ang
dalawáng binhî: Búhay at kamandág!... Búhay para sa báyang namumunò,
at kamandág sa báyang nasasakóp! Búhay sa mga trust, sa mga puhúnang
amerikáno na dito'y magsisidagsâ úpang sakmalín ang yáman ng ating
lupà, hititín ang kahulihulíhang paták sa ating dugô hanggang walâng
natitirá sa Báyan kundì ang kanyáng balát at mga buto!... Kapág ang
Báyan ay nagíng buto't balát na lang, kapag nabungkál na ang ating
lupà, kapag natibág na ang ating mga bundók, kapág walâ nang masasakmál
at mahihitít, ay saka, SAKA, SAKA tayo iíwan ng mga Trust na iyán,
sakâ tayo bibigyán ng Pagsasarilí, sakâ ipagsisigáwan ng mga angkan ni
Taft na ang Báyang Pilipino ay handa, handang handa na sa Kalayaan!!...

"Ngayón, sabíhin sa ákin kun díto sa Pilipinas ay may Justicia! Iturò
sa ákin kun saán naroon ang Justiciang iyán!"....

Humigít kumúlang ay ganitó ang mga salitang umuukilkíl sa
alaála ng walàng tígil ng kayayáo't dito at kátatanong ng "ang
Justicia?"--Pederál man siyá, ay kun bákit nahihikáyat siyang
paniwaláan ang mga salitáng iyón ng isáng independista.

Sa di kawasa'y lumápit sa higáan, inabót sa karátig na lamensa ang
isang bóteng kinadidikitan ng isang laráwan ng unggóy, at itinunggâ
ang nangangalingásaw na lamán.

Tumikím muna ng makálimá na sinabayan ng limá ring tapík sa dibdib
bágo náhigâ.

Aywan kung nátulog ó hindî.

Pagkaráan ng may kalaháting óras ay mulíng binuláhaw ang katahimikan
ng kanyáng silid.

--"Ha! ha! ha!"--ang kanyáng halakhák na pairíng mulâ sa
higàan.--"Ha! ha! ha! Nápatáy na kitá, Gerardo, nápatay na
kitá! Ha! ha! ha! Si nasírang Gerardo ka na ngayón! Madalî ang
umútang, mahírap ang magbáyad! ha! ha! ha! Sulong, takbó, humánap ka
ng Justicia, súlong! Di akó natatákot sa justiciang bulág!...

"Ha, Stag? Handiyan ka na palâ. Tinamáan ka ng.... Anó ká? At bákit
ka nagtatawá, ulól? Nasunód mo na ang ipinagagawâ ko sa iyó? Nápatay
mo na ba? Hindî? Sáyang ang salapî ko! Ulól ako't pinawalán pa
kitá... Ha? At nápatay mo ba? Siya ngâ ba? Saán mo inabútan ang
walanghiyá't dalahirang babáe?... Mabúti, mabúti kang batà!... Ang
kapupunán?... Huwág ka bang apurádo...!

"Juancho! Juancho! Gísing, gísing ka, tamád. Dilát ka na ba? Halíka
rini't ikaw ay makiníg... Susunód ka, ha?... Pag hindi, baság ang
iyóng ulo; hále, lumukólukó ka!... Ikaw ay mang-aágaw ha? aagáwin
mo ha?... Alám mo ba kun bakit?... kun bákit di ka maibig ni
Elena?... Dáhil kay Gerardo! Si Gerardo'y pinatáy ko, ikáw ang umágaw
sa kanyáng katipán?... Ha? at naágaw mo na ba?... Mabuti kang batà,
ganyán ang laláki!

"Ha! ha! ha! Busóg na busóg ako...! Usigin, ipangáw, mamatáy,
walâ na ngayóng kailangan sa ákin! Ha! ha! ha! Ganáp na ganáp ang
paghihiganti ko!..."







XIII

SA BAHAY NI PEPE


Utang sa síkap ni Gerardo at ng iláng kabinatà niyá, sa di kawasa'y
nátatag sa Libis ang isáng kapisánan na pinamagatáng "Dakilang Mithî."

Kagáya ng lahát ng mga samaháng pilipino, ang "Dakilang Mithî" ay
ulirán sa gílas at siglá noóng kanyáng mga únang buwán.

Noóng mga únang buwán, ang kapisanan ay makálawá sanglinggó kung
magpúlong, at ang bilang ng mga nagsisidaló sa mga púlong na itó ay
di lumiliít sa tatlongpû.

Noóng mga únang buwán, ang mga talumpatì, pagtatálo at ang mga bálak
na inihaharáp tuwíng magpupúlong ay punông-punô ng mahahalagáng láyon
at madláng kaparaánang magagámit upang lalong mapalúsog at mapadakilà
ang kapisánan. Náriyan ang pagtatayô ng isáng aklátán (biblioteca);
náriyan ang pagbubukás ng isang paaralán sa gabí, na walâng úpa;
náriyan ang pagpapalabás ng isáng paháyagang-linggúhan; náriyan
ang pagdadáos ng mga papúlong; náriyan ang mga sárì-sarìng campaña
lában sa Bisyo--laban sa sugál at sábong--laban sa mga mahahálay at
di wastông kaugalían, hílig, atb.: at nariyan ang kung anó-anó pang
matatáyog na panukalà.

Ang lahat ng kasiglaháng itó na napagmálas sa loób ng "Dakilang Mithî,"
noóng mga unang buwán ay lubhâng ikinaalíw ng mga nagsipagtatág sa
kapisánang iyon. Naákit siláng umasám-asám sa isáng maligáyang búkas
at napanibúlos silá sa pag-ásang madalî ó maláon ay málalasáp nilá
ang masasagánang búnga ng kaniláng mga pinuhúnang págod.

Dapwa't ¡ay! Katúlad ng isáng kimpal na kugon, na pag sinilabán ay
minsan sikláb lang at walâ ná, ang kapisánang iyón ng mga náturang
pag-ása ni Rizal (pa naman!), pagkaraán ng mga únang buwan, pagkatápos
na makapagdáos ng iláng sayáwang malalakí, nang isasagawâ na ang mga
panukálang binalangkás ng boông sípag at talíno,--ang kapisánang iyón
ay biglâng dinatalán sa noó ng karumaldúmal na kamandág ng panglalamíg,
pagkahapò at pagwawalàng bahalà ng hálos lahát ng mga kaánib!

Sinimulán ná ang isang búhay kapisánang kukutápkutáp, kagáya ng isang
ílaw na nauubúsan ng langís.

Anó mang pagsusumákit ang kalasagin ng Pángulo at Kalihim, ang
bahay-kapisánan ay láging áalóg-alóg tuwîng tatáwag ng púlong. Lahát
ay nangangakóng dádaló, dápwa't pagsápit ng oras ay pálad na pálad
ná kung sumipót ang sampû.

--"Anó ang dápat gawin úpang maipon ang mga iyán?"--Itó ang
pabuntóng-hiningáng tanóng ng pangúlo ng kapisánan.

--"Upang maipon?"--ang sambót ni Gerardo na kanyáng kaharáp,--"kung
úpang maipon lang ay may isang paráang madalî. Búkas pistá din lang
ay ikálat nátin ang balità na sa kinágabihán ay magkákaroón sa inyó
ng isang malakíng sayáwang handóg sa Samahán. Anyayáhan ang mga
kinalílituhan diyang binibinì, ang lahát ng mga makikísig sumayáw,
at maniwalà ka, katóto, na mamúmunô ang iyóng báhay... Pag handoón
ng lahát ay paalisin ang orkésta at simulán ang púlong."

At ganitó nga ang kaniláng ginawâ.



Madilímdilim pa kábukásan, ay sumabog na sa impápawíd ang balità na sa
ika 7 oras ng gabí ay magdadáos sa báhay nina Pepe ng isang maringal,
at mahabang sayáwan na handóg ng pangúlo sa masisipag na mga ginóo
at binibinìng bumubuò sa "Dakilang Mithî."

Hindî nagkabulâ ang hulà ni Gerardo. Orasyón pa lang ay pulúpulutóng
na ang mga panaúhing nagsisiratíng. Ika 7 óras na ganáp ay natitipon
doón ang ápatnapû sa limangpûng kaánib sa "Dakilàng Mithî."

Lahát ay galák na galák lubhâ na ang mga binatâ. Walang labì na di
nakangitî, walang matáng di nagniningning, walâng kílos na mabágal. At
sino ngâ namán ang di magágalák, alíng pusò ang di lálakasán ng
tibók, kanínong damdámin ang di mapupúkaw sa lílim ng mapanghalina't
malalagkit na títig, at sa halík ng bangóng núnukal sa mga sutlâng
talúlot ng mga gayóng "bulaklák ng búhay" na doo'y naliligò sa
mahínhing liwanag ng mga "Reina de las luces"? At sinong mahiligin sa
sayáw ang makukuhang magtulug-tulugan, kaninong mga páa ang mapapakalí
sa gayong idinulásdulas ng sahíg na binudburán ng pirápirásong ballena,
sa inihabá-haba't inaluwang-lúwang ng pagsásayawáng salas sa anyáya
ng malalambíng na tugtúging handóg ng orkésta?



Iká 7:15 na ng gabí, nguni't ang sayáwan ay di pa pinasísimulán. Hálos
lahát ay iníp na iníp na. Dángan lang at sila'y nadadaíg ng hiyâ,
marami na sanà ang nagúumikit noón sandalîng iyón, káhi't na walâng
anyáya ó pahintúlot ng may báhay.

Samantaláng naghihintáy ay makinig táyo sa mga sáli-salitáan.

Sa isáng súlok ng salas, ay nakaupóng magkaharáp ang dalawáng binibinì
na kung mámasdán ang kaniláng mga mukhâ, ay mapaghuhúlong sila'y may
isáng mahalagáng bagay na pinagúusapan.

--"Bákit, Pacita,"--ang bigkás ng isa,--"bakit wikà mo'y di ka na
makapagaáral?... Sáyang na sáyang pag nagkátaon!"

Si Pacita'y isang bulaklák na kabubuká pa lang. Lalabing-apat na taon
ang kanyang gulang.

--"Walâ akong magagawâ, Elíng. Ang mga tátay ang siyáng áyaw pumáyag
na ako'y magpatúloy."

--"Ayaw pumáyag?... Diyata't áyaw pumáyag? At anó namán ang dahil?"

--"Ang sabi nila'y sapát na sapát na ang kauntî kong nátutuhan sa
Primary grade; na ang isáng babáe raw ay di kailángang mag-áral
nang matagál, súkat na lang ang siya'y matutong sumúlat at bumása;
walâ raw siyáng katungkúlan kundî ang maglínis, maghúsay at tumáo sa
bahay; maglingkód sa kanyáng mga magúlang at asáwa, at mag-alagà sa
mga anák kun sakali't magkaroon."

--"At pati ba namán ang mga tatay mo, Pacita, ay napadádaig sa mga
ganyáng bulág na paniniwalà na dápat sumpain ng lahat! Diyatà namán
at tayóng mga bábae ay di kailángang mag-áral ng anomán máliban
na lang sa pagsúlat at pagbása ng kauntî? At ang karunúngan sa
isáng wastô at ginháwang pamumúhay, ang mga mararangal at tumpak na
paguugali, ang mga katungkúlan natin sa Kapisanan, sa ating báyan,
at sa Sangkataúhan--ang mga bagay báng iyán ay pagpipikitán na natín
ng matá, di na natin paguukúlan ng panahón?

"Laking kamalían!

"Túnay ngâ na katungkúlan ng isáng iná ang mag-álagà sa kanyáng mga
anák; datapwa't ang pag-aalagà sa isáng anák ay di basta't siya'y
palakihin, padamitan, pakanin, iligtás sa mga sakit, sundin ang bawa't
maibigan at palakasin ang kanyang katawán. Hindî, hindî humahanggá
ríyán ang mga katungkulan ng iná sa anák. May ibá pa siyáng tungkúlin
na lalong dakilà!

"Italâ sa noo at pusò ng anák, sa pamamagitan ng halimbawà, ang
katotohánan na siyá ay táong malayà, may púri, dangál at mga karapatán;
na walâ siyang Diyós ó panginóon sa ibábaw ng lupà kundî ang sariling
Bayan, ang dakilàng Matwíd, ang Katotohánan at ang Katungkúlan; na
ang táo ay dapat múnang magpakamatáy bago siya manakáwan ng kanyang
kalayáan, bago madungísan ang kanyáng dangál, bago siyá mahubdán
ng kanyáng mga karapatán, bago umiwas sa isang katungkulan, bago
mámalas na ang Bayan niya'y talúnan at abâ, bágo makitang ang matwíd
ay nilulúpig at binabaluktót ang katotohánan... Ikintál sa kanyang
diwâ sa pamamagitan ng halimbawà, na ang panahon ay gintô, at dahil
dito'y di dapat sayangin sa mga halíng na pangarap kundî gúgulin sa
mga bágay na pakikinabángan niyá at ng kanyáng mga kapwà; na ang táo
ay di nilaláng upang mabúhay at pagkatápos ay mamatay, tulad sa mga
gamógamó; kundî upang sa pamamagitan ng kanyang lakás ay makatulong
siyá, kahima't gabuhangin lang, sa lalòng ikasusúlong at ikadadakilà
ng Sangkataúhan. Iyán at marami pang katulad niyán, ang mabibigat na
tungkulin ng iná sa anák. At ngayon ay aking itinátanong: ¿Anó ang
magagawâ ng isang ináng hangál sa haráp ng mga ganyáng katungkúlan?

"Sinasábing katungkúlan ng isang babáe ang maglingkód sa kanyáng
mga magúlang at kabyák ng dibdíb. Mabúti! Nguni't di masasábi na
itó ang hanggán ng katungkúlan niyáng paglilingkód. Bakit? Sapagká't
gaya rin ng mga lalaki siya'y may isáng Inang Báyan na dapat niyang
lingapin.--May isang Lupàng sinilángán, Lupà na kanyáng pinagkukúnan ng
lahát ng ikabubúhay--Lupà na tinubuàn at kinalibingán ng kanyang mga
nunò! Di kayâ marápat na ang Báyang iyán ay kanyá ring paglingkurán,
at paka-ibiging higit sa sariling búhay, higit sa kanino man, higit
sa kanyáng mga magúlang, asáwa't mga anák?

"Oh Pacita! marámi pa sa áting mga matatandâ ang di nakababatíd sa
di mapupuwíng na katotohánan na ang katubúsan ng Lahì ay nasasakamay
din nátin na magiging mga iná sa araw ng búkas!..."

May ilán pa sanàng paghahakà na inulat si Elena; dapwá't sa lálapit
noon sa dalawang magkaibigan ang isang binatà na nang masulyapán ni
Elíng ay biglâng nagpapulá sa kanya nang gayon na lang at ikináputol
tuloy ng salitaan nila ni Pacita.



Iwan nátin siláng tatló, at tayo'y makiníg sa
bulúngbulúngan sa kabiláng pánig ng salas. Pulos na laláki ang
náhandoón. Pinagkákalipumpunán nilá ang isáng malápad na papel na
nakapakò sa dindíng at kinatititíkan ng salitâng programa. Sa ibabâ
nitó ay ipinaaálam na ang sayáwan ay bubuoín ng labingánim na Waltz,
labindalawáng two-steps at dalawáng rigodon.

--"Ano't may rigodon pa?"--ang payamót na tanóng ng isáng naka-lana
sa kanyáng kálapit--"Que torpe! Anóng mahihitâ sa rigodon?... Walâ
kundî.... kamáy. Mapapágod ka ng walâng... saysáy. Nakaaaksáya ng
panahón! Kalukúhan sa ákin iyán!"

--"Masamâ namán ang walâng rigodon, katoto,"--ang sagót ng isáng
naka-térnong-itím.--"At si Choy?"

--"Que Choy ni que báchoy!"--ang ángil ng naka-lana, at hinagisan ng
dalawang ingos ang isáng naka-kakeng kulot ang buhók na sa pagka't
lubhâng mahiluhín ay walâng ináabangan sa alín mang sayawan kundî ang
pasimulâng-tugtóg ng mga rigodon. Itó ang si Choy na noo'y kasalukúyang
nagpapantíng ang mga taynga, sapagka't malayôlayô man siya'y kanyang
naulinígan ang salitaan ng dalawa. Manganínganíng sugurin ang naka-lana
at sikangan ang walâng pitagang bungangà nitó. At kamuntî na ngang
manugod noon ang ating si Choy, kundî niya naala-alang gagawâ siya
ng malakíng kahiyâhiyâ, at kundî niya nataunan ang isang malambíng na
títig ni Mameng--títig na wari'y inahihímok sa kanya ang, "Pacencia,
Choy ko!"...

--"Pero, demonyo!"--ang mulîng putók ng naka-lana--"Anó ang
hinihintáy nitóng  si Pepe?... Bakit áyaw pang simulán ang sayáwan,
diantre?.... Co--! naghihintay ang mga visita,--pu--!"

--"Huwág kang mainip, katóto"--anáng naka-itím--"huwag kang mainip
at sásapulan na raw!"

--"Sásapulan! pero kailán pa? ¡demonyo!"

Isang binatà ang noón ay pumagitnâ sa karamíhan, at pagkatápos na
makaupô ang lahat, ay bumigkás ng ganitó:--







XIV

AKO'Y NANGANGAMBA!...


"Mga binibinì at ginoóng kaánib sa 'Dakiláng Mithî':--

"Kayóng lahát ay pumarito na tagláy sa pusò ang masaráp na pag-ása,
na táyo'y uumagáhing pára-pára sa pagpapasasà sa isáng malambíng na
sáyawan. Hindî kayó mabibigô mga ginóong magigitíng.

"Sáyawan at walâng ibá kundî sayáwan ang inyong ipinarito, kaya't
sáyawan at walâng ibá kundî sayawan ang dito'y áting pagdudumugan.

"Akin lang ipinagpapauna na ang sáyawang itó ay kakaibá sa lahat ng
sáyawan na inyóng alám. Wikà ngâ'y, bágong sistema; mapapálad kayo
sapagka't kayó ang unang makakákilala sa kanya!

"Sapagkâ ngâ't bágo, ay kailángang siya'y ating ipaaninaw mabúti. Sa
sayáwan pong itó, mga ginoó at binibinì, ay hindî mga páa, kamáy at
baywang ang magsisiindák. Ang dito po'y magpapakitáan ng gílas at
kisig, ay ang mga dilà't ngalá-ngalá; kaya't sayawan ng mga dilà't
ngalá-ngalá ang sa ngayóng gabí ay siyáng yáyaníg sa báhay ng ating
pangúlo!"

--"Nilint... na!!"--anáng naka-itim.

--"Pero que bruto"--ang tugon namán ng galít sa rigodon.

--"Batid ninyóng lahát mga binibinì at ginóo,"--ang patúloy ni
Gerardo--"na dito sa ating báyan ay may isang kapisanang di pa
nalaláon ay ítinayô ng kabatáan. Batíd din ninyóng lahat na sa mga
sandalîng itó ang kapisánang iyán ay kasalukúyang naghihilik sa lálim
ng pagkahimbing.

"Ang di na yatà makasanglibong pagtawag ng púlong na laging nabibigô,
ay labis na nag-uulat sa katotohanang itó. Ang pagkakabitin sa
impapawíd ng lahat ng mga panukalang inaharap at pinag tíbay sa lóob
ng kapisanan, ang pagkabigô ng aklatang itatatag, ang pagkabigô ng
páhayagáng palálabasin, ang pagkabigô ng mga papúlong, ng paaralán
sa gabí, at ng mga kung anó-anóng campaña na sagánà sa hangin--ang
lahát ng iyán mga binibinì at ginóo, ay isa pang di mapupuwing na
saksí ng pagkaúring mantikang-tulóg ng ating Kapisánang kagúlatgúlat
noóng kanyáng mga únang áraw!

"Sa gitnâ ng ganitóng kalagáyang dápat ikahiyâ ng kabatáang Libís,
síno ang áting dápat sisíhin?

"Ang mga nangungulo sa kapisánan?

"Akó na maláon nang nagmamasíd sa ginagawâ niláng pagtupád sa
kanikaniláng tungkúlin, ay walâng úlikúlik na makakapagsábi na ang
mga ginóong iyán ay nagawâ ná ang lahat ng abót ng kaniláng káya.

"Ipinatútúpad ng pangúlo sa áting mga kaanib, ang palatuntúnan at mga
alituntúnin, dápwa't áayaw táyong magsisunód! Kaniláng iminumungkahì
na isagawà ang mga panukala't bátas na pinagkayarian nátin, dápwa't
áayaw tayong magsikilos!

"Tumatáwag ang kalihim ng púlong áraw-áraw halos dápwa't áayaw táyong
magsidaló!

"Mahúsay na hinihingî ng Ingat-yáman ang ambag sa bawa't buwan ng
bawa't isa, nguni't átin siyáng pinagtátaguan!

"Síno ngayón ang dápat managót sa pagkadiwarà ng kapisánang itó?

"Síno ang dápat lagpakán ng ating pagsisisi kundî táyo rin--táyo
na bubuô ng isang kautusán at pagkatápos ay táyo rin ang sa kanya'y
susúay?

"Síno ang dápat nating sumpâin kundî ang átin ding mga katawán--Táyo,
na lilikhâ ng isang matáyog na panukalà para sa ikabubuti ng bayan at
pagkatápos kapag isasagawâ ná, ay tayo rin ang kaunáunahang malululà,
ang kaunaunáhang uurong?

"Síno ang dapat managót sa lahát ng itó, mga ginóo, kundî tayo
rin--táyo na kadalasa'y dahil lang sa kaunting sakít ng ulo, ó kaya'y
ng ngipin, ó dúlo ng kukó; dahil lang sa kauntíng ulán, sa kauntíng
ínit ng áraw, sa kauntíng antók, sa kauntíng layò ng pagpúpulungan,
sa pagkawalâng mákasáma, ó sa pagkawalâng mabuntutan--dáhil na dáhil
lang diya'y di na táyo magsisidaló sa púlong?... ¡¡Samantalàng kápag
isáng sáyawan ang atíng dádayúhin, ay sumasagasà táyo sa unós at
buháwi, nawawalâ ang sakít ng ulo, napapawì ang antók, di iniindá
ang ínit ng áraw ni sinusukat ang layò ng pagdaraanan!!

"Sino ang dápat kilabútan sa hiyâ kundî táyo rin na kung makaísip
mang dumaló sa púlong, ay panayon na lang mga hulí--panayón na lang
animo'y mga kúhol?--Táyo na muntíng maantig ang bulsá, munting mahingan
ng maipagtatawid búhay ang kapisánan, ay magpápakalayô-layô na di na
maáapúhap kahi't na nakakayanan ang halagáng hinihingî? ¡¡Samantaláng
kapág ang isáng sáyawan ang paguukúlan, ay malúwag na malúwag at
galák na gálak táyong nagkakaloób ng píso, piso't isang salapì,
at kung minsan pa'y hanggang dalawá!!

"¡Ah, mga kabábayan!... Kung ang mga katotohanang itó na sakdál
ng papaít ay nakasusúgat sa inyóng mga damdámin, ako'y di
nagsisisi! ¡Tinutupád ko ang áking katungkúlan!

"Karápatdápat at kailángang mabatíd nating lahát ang hubád at wagás
na katotohánan, na, ang kabatáan sa bayang itó ay kúlang pa ng lakás,
kulang pa ng tyagâ, pagtitiis, at siglâng walâng máliw! Walâ pa ditong
tunay na kalakasan ng loob na kinakailangan upang maisagawâ ang isang
adhikâng mataas!

"Ah, Kabatáan, Kabatáan! Kay lakás mong mangárap, dapwa't kay dalî mong
masawan, kay dalîng manglumó ng iyong pusò, kay dalî kang panghináan
ng túhod!...

"Iyán ba ang kabatáang pinangápangárap ng Dakilàng Rizal?

"Iyán ba ang kabatáang inaasahang tútubós sa Báyang itó na ngayo'y
nábibingit sa bangin ng kamatáyan?

"Iyán ba ang mga kawal ng tagumpay Bukas?

"¡Ah, Kabatáan! kung ang mga malilíit na kapisanan ay di mo
mapagtiyagaang buháyin, papaáno kayâng pagbúhay ang iyong gágawin sa
isâng Bayang malayà?

"Kaunti pang paghuhunosdilì, kaunti pang paglingap sa dangal ng
katungkulan! Kauntî pang pag aáalaála sa kinábukasan!

"Samantálang ikáw, Kabataan ay waláng hanap kundî sayá at ligaya,
samantálang di ka natutútong umibig sa walâng likát na pagpapágod,
pagbabatà ng hirap, at pagsusunóg ng kílay; samantalang, di ka
natutútong tumalikod sa mapanghalinang kawáy ng mga bulaklák, sa
matatamis na awit ng mga sirena, úpang makatupád sa isáng katungkúlan;
samantalang ikáw ay nabúbuhay sa himpapawíd ng mga pangárap at di
sa párang ng paggawâ; samantalang ikaw ay walâng loob na íukol sa
sarili mong bayan ang bawa't galaw ng iyong isip, bawa't tibók ng
pusò, bawa't sandalî ng iyong panahón, bawa't paták ng iyong dugô;
samantalang nananatili ka sa mga ganyáng kalagáyan, ikáw, kabataan,
ikaw ay di dapat tawaging Pag-asa ng tinubuan mong lupà; ang dápat
itáwag sa iyó ay Hampas ng Diyós sa iyóng Lahì!"

Pinútol dito ni Gerardo ang kanyáng talumpatì. Dátí-dáti tuwî siyáng
magsasalitâ nang hayág, ay di maúbos-úbos ang papuri sa kanyá ng madlâ;
nguni't ngayón, maánong nagtamó siyá nang kahi't gaputók na palakpák!

Sa mga binatà marámi ang sa kanya'y ngungusò-ngusò at iírap-irap;
may iláng dadábog-dábog at búbulong-bulóng.

Si Choy ay tuwâng-tuwâ nang maalámang di mátutulóy ang ipinangakong
sayáwan. Kamuntî na siyáng makalápit sa naka-lana upang ito'y
mábigyan ng isáng mabining "Hiilatt!" Ang mukhâ ng naka-lana ay di
maipintá noón. Hindi nagkásiya sa isinimásimángot at ipinisépshe. Sa
huling bahági ng talumpatì ni Gerardo ay walâng ibinubugá ang
nagkakangngingiwi niyang mga labì, kungdî payak na:

--"Suplado! Hambug! Hi...! Palalò! Yabang!... Para ka riyang isang
lélong na nangangaral sa amin ah! Cu...!"

Pabulóng kun bigkasín ang mga salitáng itó, na anopa't walâng
nakáririníg kundî yaong mga malalapit sa kanyá!

Hindî lang ang bibig ng naka-lana ang nangungusap: ang mga matá niya
ay may lalong mahalagáng bágay na inihahayág. Ang mga namumutèng matáng
iyón kun titígan si Gerardo nang siya'y nagsasalitâ ay parang tumitítig
sa isang nag-papaálam na bibitayin, kundi man sa isang kabaong na,
sa isang tigmak na sa dugô!

Ang naka-lana ay si Juancho!--si Juanchong masidhing kaaway ni
Gerardo sa lahat ng bagay; ang nabigông kandidato sa kamay ni Elena,
ang bunsong kapatid ni Kápitang Memò na kanyang kinasapakat sa madugô
niyáng paghihigantí kay Gerardo!--paghihigantíng gáganapin nilá sa
gabí ding iyón!....



Nang matápos ang talumpatì ni Gerardo, ang pangulo namán ng "Dakilàng
Mithî" ang pumagitnâ. Siyá ay isáng táo na di-masalitâ; at kung
magsalitâ man siyá ay banayad, parang tinitimbáng ang mga sinasábi;
hindi siyá gumagámit ng mga salitâng labis at di kailangan; walâng
bulá-bulaklák, waláng pahá-pahángin, gaya ng daan-daan diyang mga
mananalumpatî na tuwing magsasalitâ ay walang nagagawâ kundi lunurin
sa hángin ang sa kanila'y nakíkinig. Ang pangulo ng "Dakilang Mithî"
(kun ibig ng bumábasa na siya'y lalong mákilala) ay isang nagaaral ng
Derecho sa isang bantóg na paaralán sa Maynilà; ilang taón na lang at
siya'y tútupad na sa dakilàng tungkuling pagtatanggól sa kápwa.--"Hindî
bagay sa iyó ang mag-abogado, Abraham!"--ang láging iginigiit sa kanyá
ng mga kaibigan--"Ang dapat mag-abogado ay yaóng mga táong masalita,
hindî ang mga walang kibó na gaya mo!" Labis na batid ni Abraham
ang kaululan at kahangalang isinisiwálat ng mga gayóng pangungusap;
kaya't lalò niyang tinikís. Samantalang hinihigpitán ang kapit niyá
sa pagaaral ng Derecho ay lalòng pinag-ibáyo niya ang pagtitipid
ng salitâ. Sa paninikis na ito ni Abraham, ay ibig mandín niyang
ipamatâ sa mga bulág na pag-iísip ng kanyáng mga kakilála na upang
maging isáng mapagwagîng abogado ay di kailangan na magíng isang
daldalero!... Kay rumami ngâ namán ang nagkakamalî sa bahaging ito
ng Karunúngan, ang akalà nila'y sa pamamagìtan ng isáng bungangang
walang tahán ng kábubugá, ay mapasusukò ng isang abogado, sa alin
mang usapin, ang kanyáng kalában; at ang isang táong bungangero ay
pílit na magíging isang maningníng na abogado.

Kung gayo'y dapat manding imungkahì sa pamahaláan, na magtatág ng
isang Escuela de Derecho sa loób ng Hospicio de San Jose para sa mga
nakukulóng doón, na kahi't nagiisa ay... ¡usáp pa rin ng usáp!...

Oh, magsipagtahan kayó mga úlong marurupok!

Hindî pa ninyó batíd yaong mga palásak na kasabihang: "Ang pantas
ay walang kibo" alalaong baga'y hindì daldalero ni daldalera. (He
who is wise, keeps still.) (Hombre de poco habla mucho piensa.) At,
"ang salita ay Pilak (¡ngunì't!) ang pananahimik ay GINTO!" (Speech
is Silver, silence is GOLD!)

Hindî pa rin ninyó batid ang mga katotohánang sumusunód:

1.--Na, upang maging pantás sa alin mang hánapbuhay, maging sa
pag-aabogado at maging sa pag-memedico, atb., ay dalawáng bagay ang
kailangan: Una, Magmasid; ikalawa, Kumuro. Ngayon, ako'y nagtatanóng,
sino ang lalong malínaw magmasid at kumuro: ang isang walâng humpay ng
katututtuttut, ó ang isang tahímik na nakíkiníg at umiísip, maíngat
na tumítingin at tumitimbang sa bawa't tamaan ng matá?

2.--Ang abogado, ó sino mang táong di masalitâ, tangi na lang ang mga
mangmang, ay may panahon upang pagarálan at lubáhing mabúti sa kanyáng
ulo, ang isang pagkukurò, bago ihayág; nakapipilì siyá ng mga salitang
angkóp at matitíbay; napipilì niyá ang lalong matíbay na paglalahad sa
ibig sabíhin. Ano ang ibinubunga? Kaliwanagan! Lakas! Ang kaliwanágan
ng pangungusap ay kapangyaríhan sa isang pagtatalo!

Samantalang sa kabilang dáko, ang isáng walâng pahinga ng daldál,
tangi pa sa nakayáyamót at nakaaaksayá ng panahón (hindî lang ng
kanyáng panahon kundî patí ng panahón ng kausap) ay di nagagáwing
timbangin at kuruìng mabuti ang isáng bágay bago ihayág; di napipilì
ang mga salitang dapat gamítin; walâng mahúsay at makatwirang
pagkakasunódsunód ang kanyáng isinásalaysáy; nálalahók ang mga bágay
na waláng kabuluhán at di kaílángan, at kun minsan pa'y sa kadalasán
ng salitâ ay di naiísip ni naaalaman ang mga pinagsasabí! Anó ang
napapala? Kahinàan! Kagusután! Kalabuan!

At ang isang abogadong mahinang mangatwíran, magusút kung umisip at
malábong mangúsap ay isáng abogadong ... ¡kahabág-habág!

3.--Ang mga abogado na kapag nagtatanggól sa isáng paglilítis, ay
walang nalálakasán kundî payák na pahángin at daldal, mga paikot-ikot
at walâng katuturáng pangungúsap, ay paraparang kinasúsunukán,
kinarírimaríman at hindi pinagdídidiníg sa loób ng mga hukúmang ináabot
ng liwánag ng siglo XX... Ang tinatangkílik, ang kinasasabikán, ang
dinídinig, ang kiníkilingan, di man sinasadyâ, ng hiyáng ó simpatía
ng isang taál at pantás na hukom, at yaóng abogado na di nagaaksáya ng
salitâ, yaóng di nagsasalitâ kundi kailángan, yaóng maalam ihayág ang
ibig sabihin sa íilan at pinilìng salitâ, yaóng malumánay, banáyad,
dapwa't matibay at matalínong mangangatwíran, yaóng bawa't bigkasín
ay may kahulugán, bawa't isalaysáy ay malínaw at mahúsay--iyán ang
túnay na abogadong dapat kilalánin ng lahat.

Dápwa't, gíliw na bumabasa, tayo mandin ay lubhang napapakálulong
sa pagkakalayo sa sinúlid ng ating kasaysáyan. Tayo'y búmalik at
pakinggan natin kung anó ang sásabihin ng pangulo ng "Dakilang Mithî"
sa kanyáng mga kasamahán.

"Mga kasáma:

"Upang tayo'y magkatipon, at makapagdáos ng púlong, ako'y náyag na
kayo'y dayàin.

"Ang pagdadayà ay masamâ.

"Nguni't kung minsán ay kailangang gumawâ ng masamâ upang matamó ang
isang kabutihan.

"Kailangang barilín ng isáng pinunò ang sundálo niyáng tumátakbó sa
labanán upang ang ibá ay huwag magáyang umúrong.

"Kailangang sugátan ang bató upang mapalabás ang kanyáng apoy.

"Ngayon: alam na ninyó kung bakit kayo'y aming dinayà.

"Ayókong aksayahín pa ang mahalagá ninyóng panahón.

"Pasimulán nátin ang púlong.

"Mga ginoó: anó ang inyóng pasiya? Sa áking akala'y ang kapisánang
itó ay dapat nang lansagín.

"Dapat lansagín ang sabí ko sapagka't walang kabutihan siyang
nililikhâ; bagkus pa ngang payak na kasamâan ang kanyang ibinubunga.

"Sa kapisánang itó nagbubúhat ang pagbibigátan ng loób, díto nababanáag
ang lahat ng mga ugáling karumaldúmal ng kabataang Libis; dito nádadamá
ang maráming katotohanang masasakláp na dápat ikahiyâ ng ating mga
nunò sa kabiláng búhay.

"Hindî kayâ marápat na lansagín ná ang kapísanang iyán?

"Hintáy ko ang pasiyá ng kapulúngan."

Ang kapulúngan ay di sumásagot. Ang banáyad nguni't matitinding
pangungusap ng pangulo, ang nanginginig niyáng bóses, ang kanyang
nagbabagang paningin, ay nagpayukô sa lahat. Ni si Juancho, ni si Choy,
ni ang naka-itim ay walâng naihumá.

Naghaharì sa boóng báhay ang piping katahimikan. Nakaraan ang limang
minuto; walâ pa ring sagót.

Walang kamalák-malák ay nangagtilian ang mga babáe.

"Demónyo! Tatay ko! Demónyo! Nanay ko! Demónyong sungayan! Demónyong
may buntot!"--ang sigaw niláng dî magkamáyaw.

At demónyo ngâ namán!... (Noon ay kasalukúyang nagdadaos ng Karnabál
sa Maynilà.)

Sinalúbong ng pangulo sa hagdánan ang nakabalat-kayô. Isáng liham
para kay Gerardo ang taglay niyá.

--"Síno kayâ itó?"--anang naka-itim at pagdaka'y lumápit sa demonyo
na nakatingin kay Gerardo samantalang binabasa nito ang tinanggap
na liham.

--"Sino ka bagá, ha?"--ang mulîng tanong ng naka-itim, at pagdaka'y
sinulot sa tagilíran ang nakabalatkayô.

--"Aruy! Tinamaan ka ng...!"

Ang ¡aruy! ay ibinunga ng isáng tábig ng demonyóng nakilitî--tabig
na tumamà sa sikmurà ng pangahas. Dalì-dalìng umupo ang naka-itim na
tutóp ang tiyán.

Humúgong sa tawa ang boong bahay.

Ang pangulo ay pumukpók sa kanyang laménsa. Naputol ang tawánan
dapwa't di ang bulúngbulúngan, di ang pagsulyáp sa demónyo at sa
tinábig niyáng napangiwi't súkat.

--"Síno nga kayâ iyan?" ang mulîng usisa ng bálana.

--"Ah, kilala ko na! iyán ay si Tunyò"--anang isa.

--"Hindî, si Basio iyán!"--anang isa pa--"tingnán mo't ang katawán
ay Basiong-basio!"

--"Hindî; maniwalà kayó,"--ang sabád namán ni Choy--"iyan eh si
kumpáring Kulás."

Malî silang lahat. Si Juancho lámang ang nakababatid kun sino ang
demonyóng iyon!

--"Pagsalitaín ngâ natin"--ang bigkas ng isang pingkaw--"Hoy
demónyo! demónyo! magsalitâ ka ngâ."

Ang demónyo'y parang bingí. Hindi ináalis ang tingin kay Gerardo na
pagkatápos na mabása ang sulat ay lumapit sa may dalá at tumanóng:

--"Sino kayo?"

Ang demonyo'y parang pipi. Kumumpás-kumpás na lang at iginaláwgaláw
ang ulo na tila ang ibig sabihi'y:

"Manáog ka sa lupa't doón táyo magkakaalam!"

Si Gerardo ay napangitî na lang sa ikinumpás-kumpás ng
nakabalatkayô. Dapat kayâ siyáng sumáma? Tiningnán ang liham at
sandaling nag-alinlángan; pagkwa'y,

--"Táyo!"--anya, at inakbayán pa mandín ng demonyo, bágo silá nanáog.

--"Naku! Si Gerardo!"--ang di man kinukusa'y nalaglág sa mga labì ni
Pacita na malakíng totoó ang tákot sa demonyo, palibhasa't noón lang
siyá nakakita ng gayóng gayák.

Si Elena namán ay putlâng-putlâ; kákabá-kabá ang kanyáng dibdib.

--"Kilalá mo ba iyón?"--ang pangatál na tanóng kay Florante na kanyáng
kaibigan, at noó'y kasiping sa upô.

--"Hindi, ah!"

--"Masamâ ang kutob ng áking loób. Nagíisá si Gerardo--Baka siya'y
kung anhin!... Ako'y nangangambá!"...

--"Susundán ko!"

--"Para mo nang awà Florante."

Noón di'y nanáog ang binatà.







XV

"GERARDO, NÁSAÁN KA?"


Ang púlong na binagabag ng demonyo ay mulîng pumayapà.

Maging ang mga laláki at maging ang mga babáe ay áayaw sumukò; áayaw
pumáyag na lansagin ang kapisánan.

Aywan kung dáhil sa anóng kababalaghán, aywan kung dáhil sa talumpatì
ni Gerardo ó kung dáhil sa pagsipót ng demonyo, ang lahat ng mga
taga-"Dakilàng Mithî" ay nakitáan noóng mga sandalîng iyón ng
isáng kagúlat-gúlat na pagbabágo. Katúlad sila nina Adán at Eva na
nang mapagkurò ang kaniláng pagka-hubád ay nangahiyâ't dálidáling
nagsipágtapî; katulad silá ni San Lázaro na nang patindigin ni Krísto,
sa kanyáng libing ay tumindíg ngâ't muling nabúhay. Anopa't sa minsáng
sábi, ang naunsiyaming siglá ng "Dakiláng Mithî" wari baga'y muling
nanariwà.

Pinagkáisahan na ipatutúloy ang lahát at báwa't isá ng mga panukalàng
nabibitin; álalaóng bagá'y ang úkol sa páaralán, aklátan papúlong,
mga campaña, atb. At noón ding gabing iyón ay nag-ambágan ang lahát,
máliban na lang ang ilán na talagáng ibig nang tumiwalág sa samahán;
kaya't walang kamalák-malák ay nakatípon at súkat ang ingat-yáman
ng salapîng sapát at katamtáman upang maisagawâ ang kaniláng mga
matatáyog na pangárap na muntî nang mabulók.



Sa hulîng bahági ng púlong ay nagkaroón ng kaunting pagtatálo;
pinagtalúnan ang kung nararápat ó hindî na ang kapisánan ay manghimások
sa politika.

Si Faure ay nagsasabing nararápat; at siyá ang nagpalagay na ang
kapisanan ay maaáring lumahok sa polítika; samantálang sa kabilang
panig si Juancho namán ay nagmamatigás na di nararápat. Itóng hulí
ay bumigkás ng isáng mahabàng talumpatì na dinulúhan ng mga ganitóng
pangungusap:

--"Manghimasok táyo sa polítika?... Kay samâng palagáy!... Táyo
na mga batàng-batà pa, ¿anó ang áting masasápit sa gáwaing
iyán?... Huwag táyong pakasúlong, mga kabinatà, huwág mangahás sa di
nátin káya... Kailangan dito'y mahabàng pag-aáral, mga malalálim na
pagkukurò at pag-iísip na hinóg at di hiláw na gáya ng átin. Ipaubayà
iyán sa mga matatandâ; iya'y di nábabágay sa kabatàan"....

Si Juancho ay umupô; pagdáka nama'y tumindíg sa dákong likod niyá
si Faure.

--"G. Pangulo"--anya--"di ako namamanghâ sa pagsalungát ni ginoóng
Santos sa áking palagáy; kamí ay láging magkalayô ng damdámin;
siya'y isá sa mga sumásambá sa bandilàng áyaw hiwalayán ng
mga Pederal; ang ngálan ko nama'y nakatítik sa plataforma ng
Partido Nacionalista.... Wikà niya'y di táyo dápat manghimások
sa polítika, sapagka't táyo raw ay mga batàngbatà pa, sapagka't
tayo'y walâ pang káya.... Di ko hinahanápan ang ginoó ng ibáng
paghahakà.... Walâng káya! Iyán ang bukáng-bibig ng mga gaya niyáng
Pederal at ng kaniláng mga amá-amáhan; iyán ang kaniláng pangarap
araw gabi, iyán ang lagì niláng naguguni-gunitâ, dinádasál-dasál,
ibinúbulóng-bulóng... Ipinahihiwátig ko sa aking katálo na sa pagnanasà
kong pumások ang kapisánan sa bakúran ng polítika, ay walâ akóng
minimithî kundi ang pagsikápang liwanágan ang mga tungkúlin ng mga
mámamáyan sa kaniláng Tinubúan; bakáhin iyáng ating namamalas ngayóng
mga kahálay hálay na pagwawalang bahalà, mga kasagwâan ng ilán sa
ating mga pinunò, at ang mga duwág na pagyuyukô ng ulo sa haráp ng
mga mapagharì-harìan. Hiláhin sa liwánag ng áraw at ihantád sa matá ng
Bayan ang mga kaáway niyáng lihim, sina Masasakim, sina Mapagbalatkayó,
sina Kukong-lawin. Pukáwin ang lakás ng lahì upáng palayasin dito
ang mga dayúhang magdarayà na sumasalungat sa kanyáng pinakamámahal
na damdámin at náis, at yumuyúrak nang líhim sa karapatán at kalayàan
na pamána ng Diyós sa kanyá. Ipaála-ála sa kanyáng lagì na ang Báyang
di kumikilos ng ganitó, ang Báyang nagtítiís sa pagwawalâng kibô at
nagkakasya na lamang sa lihim na pananangis, kapág siya'y dinudusta,
ang bayang iya'y alípin, busabos, duwág... Itó, mga kababayan,
ang pinakamimithi kong layunin ng ating kapisánan. ¿At alin ang
kaluluwáng may dangal, matandâ man ó batà, na makapagsasabing siya'y
walang lakás at káya na tumupad na ganitóng dakilang katungkúlan?

"Mga batà pa raw táyo! Ang isip yata'y pulós na matatandâng hukluban
lamang ang marúnong sumurì sa mga bágay na iyán!... Sa isáng binatà ay
walâng dápat makasindák, walang dápat makapígil sa kanyáng paglakad,
waláng dapat makahadláng sa kaniyang iniíbig; kaya't walâ sa matwid
ang isang magsábing tayo'y walâng káya na maghimasok sa polítika."

Si Juancho noo'y kasalukuyang ninenerbyos. Di magkantututo sa
pagsigaw ng:

--"G. Pangulo; hindi ko maáayunan ang mga ipinahayag ng hulíng
nagsalitâ, hindi nga po, at makásanglibong hindî!!..." (at dito'y
pinanginig pa mandin ang boses na ubos-diin) "Ipinalálagay ko pong
ipaliban ang pagtatalo sa..."

Isáng malakás na pukpok sa lamesa ng Pangulo ang ikinaputol.

--"Di matátanggap ng mesa ang inyóng palagáy,"--anya--"sapagka't di
pa napasisiyahán ng pulong ang palagay ni G. Faure na kinatigan ni
G. Lauro."

Dali-daling umupô si Juancho. Nagpatuloy ang Pangulo:

--"Mayroón pa bang pagtatalo tungkól sa bagay na ito?... Kung wala,
lahat ng umaáyon sa mungkahi na ang kapisanan ay maáaring manghimasok
sa polítika, ay magsitindig."

Sa apat na pu't tatlong kaanib na naroroón, ay anim lang ang di
tumindig.

--"Ginoóng Pangulo"--ang mulîng bigkás ni Faure--"Ipinalálagay ko
pô na ang 'Dakilàng Mithî' sa pamamagitan ng kaníyáng pangulo, at
kalihim ay magpadalá ng isáng kalatás sa bawa't kapisánan ng kabatáang
natátatag sa Sangkapulûan, upang sila'y anyayáhan na umánib sa átin
sa paghingî sa Báyang amerikano ng lalòng madalî at karakarakang
Pagsasarilí ng Filipinas."

--"Kinakatigan ko pô ang palagáy ni G. Faure"--ang pagdaka'y isinunod
ni Pacita.

Lahát ng matá ay nakasulyap kay Juancho, na sapagka't leader ng
mga pederal sa "Dakilàng Mithî" ay siyang lalòng may katungkúlang
sumalungat sa gayóng mungkahì.

Nakaraan ang iláng sandalî.

Si Juancho ay dî umiímik! Nakapakò ang paningín sa kanyáng orasán na
para bagáng binibilang ang mga ¡tiktak-tiktak! nitó. Manaká-nakáng
tingalaín at pakiramdaman ang bubóng na páwid ng báhay. Ang boông anyô
niyá ay gaya ng sa isáng mangangáso, na mulâ sa malayò ay nakikiníg
sa takbuhan ng mga usá.

Sa gayóng lagay ni Juancho, ay di niyá nápapansín ang ikinindát-kindát
sa kanyá ng kanyáng mga manók na ang ibig sabihi'y "Lantakan mo!"; di
niya nararamdamán ang mga kalabít sa kanyá ng mga násalikod; di niya
alumána ang pangungunot ng noó ng naka-itim na nang di na makapagbatá
ay bigláng lumundág at úbos lakás na inahiyáw ang isáng matápang na

--"G. Pangulo!!"

--"G. Kabúyas"--ang tugón namán ng pangulo.

Si Kabúyas ay naghágis muna kay Juancho ng isáng nanglilísik na tingin,
bágo nagpatuloy:

--"Sa ngalan pô ng dangál ng 'Dakilang Mithî' ay tinututúlan kong
mahigpit ang mungkahì ni G. Faure.

"Hindî ko mapagkurò kung bakit ang isáng magiting na ginoóng gaya
ni G. Faure ay makaísip na magharáp dito ng isáng palagáy na waláng
kaúlo-úlo at walâng maibubunga kundî libo-libong pulà sa katalinuhan ng
'Dakilang Mithî!'"

--"Bravo! Bravo!!"--ang di magkamáyaw na sigaw ng mga pederál. Ito'y
lalò pa manding nagpainit kay Kabúyas.

--"Oo nga pô, mga binibinì at ginoó, kapag ang kapisánang ito ay
tinanggáp ang palagáy ni G. Faure, ang kakamtán natin ay di lang
libo-libo, kundî yutà-yutàng pulà!!

"Anó pô ang ating mahihitâ sakali ma't umanib sa atin ang ibáng mga
Kapisánan sa paghingî ng karakarakang pagsasarilí sa Báyang amerikano?

"Didinggín bagá táyo ng pamahaaán? Makikitúngo ba ang pamahalaáng
iyan sa mga gáya nating musmós?

"Kung ang Kapulungang Báyan ngâ ay di pinakitunguhan nang humingî
itó ng Pagsasarili, ¿táyo pa kayâ?

"Malaking katiwalìan ang nilaláyon ni G. Faure!

"Kung ang kapisánan ay may talino at dangál, ang palágay na ito'y di
niyá sasang-ayúnan."

Si Kabúyas ay naupô sa gitnâ ng boông kasiyaháng loób. Si Faure namán
ang tumindíg.

--"Mga kasamahan,"--anyá--"itinatanóng ni G. Kabúyas kun anó raw ang
mahihitâ ng kabatàan sa paghingî ng karakarakang Pagsasarilí. Hindî
pulà gáya ng maling hinágap ng áking katálo kundî pagpúri pa ngâ ng
ating báyan sa ganitong pagkilos.

"Hindî man táyo dinggin ng Báyang amerikano ¿ay anó? Makagaganáp
tayo sa isang katungkúlan! Katungkúlan ng bawa't táo na hingin ang
Kalayàan ng kanyáng Lupà kapág ito'y handâ nang lumayà. Mga busabos
lang ang ayáw humingî ng Kalayàan. Ang Pilipinas ay maláon nang handâ
sa isáng Malayàng Búhay. Ibig ba nátin na ang kabatàang Pilipino ay
panganláng mga busábos?

"Hindî lang pagganáp sa isáng katungkúlan ang nilalayon ng áking
mungkahì. Ibig ko ring ipamatá sa Pamunúang amerikáno ang katotohánan
na di lang ang mga matatandâng pilipino, kundî patí ang kabatàan ay
nagkákaisá sa pananalig na ang pagsasarilí ng Pilipinas ay dápat
nang ibigáy sa kanyá; at dáhil sa katotohánang ito ay panahon na
ngayóng ang Pamahalaáng iya'y magbágo ng kilos; dápat na ngayóng
manaínga at mag-áral gumálang sa damdáming isinisigáw ng Káluluwá
ng Báyang namamanhík sa gitnâ ng dúsa. Panahón na ngayóng dápat
ipamálas ng Amerika, di lamang sa haráp ng Kapilipinúhan kundî patí sa
harap ng Sangsinúkob, na siyá ay may isáng púsong túnay na bayáni ng
Kalayàan. Panahón na ngayóng dapat isagawâ ang pangungúsap ni McKinley,
na ang hangad ng Báyang amerikano, sa kanilang panghihimasok díto,
ay di ang pagsúpil kundî ang pagpapalayà sa mga pilipino, (not as
a conquering, but rather as a liberating nation.) At panahón na
rin ngayóng dapat ipagsigáwan sa mapagbingíbingíhang Amérika ang
di maitátakwíl na katotohánan, na isáng panglulúpig at walâ kundî
panglulúpig ang magharì sa áyaw paharì; na isáng ásal-ganid ang
pagsikíl sa buhay ng may karapatáng mabúhay nang malayà; na isáng
ásal-háyop ang pagsasamantala ng Malakás sa Mahinà!...

"Anó pa ang hinihintáy ng Pamahalaáng nakasásakóp? Ibig ba ng
Pamahalaáng iyán na si Washington at ang kanyáng mga kapanahóng
namuhúnan ng dugo, sa pagtatagúyod sa hangád ng báyan nila nang
maghimagsik; ibig ba ng Pamahalaáng amerikano, aking inuulit, na
magsibalikwás ang mabubunying kaluluwang itó sa kaniláng libingan at
siyá ay sisíhin sa di pagtupád sa kanyáng tungkúlin? Alin pang áraw
ang ibig dumating? Kun kailan ba pumutî ang uwak?"...

Napútol dito ang talumpatì ni Faure. Si Juancho noón
ay biglang lumundag mulâ sa kanyáng upô at nagsisigáw
ng--"Sunog! Sunog!! Sunog!!!"

At siyá ngâ namang totoo! Nagliliáb ang palupo ng báhay!

Nangamutlâ ang lahát. Di magkamáyaw ang mga "tubig!" at "Diyos
ko!" Nangagtilían ang mga babáe. Nangag-iyákan ang mga batà.

Takbó ríni at takbó roón; sigáw dini at sigáw doón.

Nangag-unahán ang lahat sa pagpanáog.

Lumalakí ang apóy! Tupók na ang bubóng ng báhay.



Samantalang nagkákaguló ang lahat sa lupà, doon naman sa itaás ay
may ibang nangyayári.

Dalawáng táo ang nakatayô sa punò ng hagdan: isang babáe na pinipigil
ng isáng lalaki.

--"Elena,"--ang mabangís na wikà nitong hulí--"sasáma ka sa ákin ó
ikáw ay mamámatay!"

--"Ulól! at síno kang sasamáhan ko?"

--"¡Ang katawán mo ó ang iyong búhay!!"--ang muling sigaw ng lalaki
at lalòng hinigpitán ang pigil sa kamay ni Elena.

--"Háyop! bitíwan mo akó!"

--"Di maaarì!"

Sa kapipitlág ni Elena ay nabitáwan ng pumipigil ang kanyáng
kamáy. Hálos palundág na nanáog. Nguni't di pa hálos nararatíng
ang kalahatìan ng hagdán, siya'y inábot na namán ng taksíl. Ang
pangingibábaw ng Malakás sa Mahinà ay mulíng napatunayan.

Sinapúpo ng lalaki ang binibining nanglalambót; ipinanhík mulî, at
saka ipinanáog doón sa kabiláng hagdán, sa bandáng likód ng báhay. Walâ
doón ni isáng táo, sapagka't ang lahát ay nagkakatípon sa harapán.

--"Gerardo, oh Gerardo! násaan ka?"--ang tánging naisigáw ni Elena.

--"Gerardo?, anóng Gerardo?"--ang pairíng na tugón ng lalaki.--"Anó
pa ang Gegerarduhin mo ngayón? Si Gerardo'y patáy ná!"

--"Tampalasang táo!!"

--"Yaóng nanhík kanínang suót demónyo ang siyáng umutás sa kanyá!"

--"Oh mga tampalásan!!"

Si Elena ay hinimatay.

--"Lalong mabuti!"--ang sa sarilí'y nawikà ni Juancho, at pagdaka'y
inalúlan ang abâng si Elíng sa kalesa niyáng doo'y inihandâng
talagá.--"Kutsero, pika!!"







XVI

SA ILÁNG NG MGA ASWÁNG


Ang líham na tinanggáp ni Gerardo ay lábis nang nag-úlat sa kanyá na
sa gabing iyón ay pilit siyáng makasasagupà ng isang kataksilán.

Lábis din niyáng alám na ang pagpáyag na sumáma sa demónyo ay lubhâng
mapangánib.

Dápwa't umúrong sa panganib ay ugalì lang ng mga pusong marurupók,
hindî ng mga gaya niyáng walâng tákot na kinikilala kundî ang tákot
sa kaniláng Diyós at Báyan; hindî ng mga


            "Mapagbiróng lagì sa tampó ng buhay
            "Mapaglarô kahi't sa labì ng hukay."


Ang gabí noón ay sakdal ng dilim. Sa maulap at masungit na langit,
ay walâ ni isa mang bituin.

Nang siná Gerardo ay mapaláot na sa gayong kadilimán, ang demonyo ay
nagtumúlin ng lakad. Si Gerardo naman ay nagliksí din.

--"Sabihin na, páre, kung kayo'y sino;"--ang patawang wika ng binatà
sa kanyang kasama.

Ang pagkapípi ng demonyo ay patúloy pa rin. Walang itinugón kay Gerardo
kundî mga di mawatásang bulóng; at lalòng binilisán ang hakbáng.

Saán silá patúngo? Itó maráhil ang ibig na maaláman ng bumabasa.

Dapat munang unawain na ang báhay nina Pepe na kanilang pinanggalingan
ay nagíisang nakatayô sa labás ng báyan ng Libis, sa tabi ng isang
mahabàng dáan na patungo sa Maynilà. Mulâ sa bahay na iyón, ang
isáng maglalakbay sa Maynilà ay kailangang lumakad ng mga isáng óras
bago dumating sa kapwà báhay. Ang dáang itó na patungo sa Maynilà, ay
siyáng tinatalakták nina Gerardo. Kalahating óras na siláng naglálakad
nguni't di pa tumitigil. Naiinip na si Gerardo, dapwa't gayón na lang
yatà ang kagandahan ng kanyáng ugalì na kahi't ang isáng pagkainip ay
áayaw ipahalatâ kahi't sa isáng demonyo. Bukód sa rito'y talagá namáng
nátigasán niyá ang pakikipagtagálan sa kanyáng kasáma saan man siya
dalhín palibhasa't malaki ang nais niyáng mabatid kung tunay ngang
matutupad ang mga sumbat sa kanyá na natatalâ sa tinanggáp na liham.

Sa di kawasa'y lumikô ang demonyo sa isáng landás. Ang binatà nama'y
lumiko din.

Di naláon at sila'y sumápit sa isáng iláng, na dáhil sa kasukálan, ay
matatawag nang gúbat. Isang bahagi ng iláng na íto ay pinangingilagang
lubhâ ng mga matatakuting taga-Libis túlad ng pangingilag nilá sa isáng
libingan. Di umano'y may mga lunggâ doón ang mga aswáng. Di umano'y
ang mangahas na máglagalág doón sa kalalíman ng gabí ay nawawalâ't
súkat. May mga báboy daw na sungayan, mga kalabáw na parang bága
ang mga matá, at mga ásong singlalakí ng kabáyo, na parapárang
nanghaharang doón.

Itó ang lugal na tinutungo ng demónyo.

--"Abá pare,"--ang birò ng binatà--"¡baka tayo'y harangin diyán
ng aswang!"

Lalòng nagtumúlin ng lákad ang demónyo at saka tumigil ng
biglâng-biglâ.

Dinukot sa bulsá ang isang aywan kung anó, bago inalápit sa mga
labì. Hinipan. Ang tunóg ay katúlad ng huni ng ahas. Noon di'y
pahangos na tumátakbo sa kanilang kinatatayuán ang isáng... ¿aswáng
na kayâ?... putót na putót ng damit na itím--tulad sa itím ng gabí.

Ang bágong-datíng at sakâ ang demónyo ay lumayo sa binatá ng iláng
dipá, at nagbulungan.

Sandalî lamang at ang demónyo'y pasugód na lumápit kay
Gerardo. Sinaklót itó sa liig, at sakâ nagngi-ngitngit na tumanóng:

--"Walâng-hiyâ, ¿kilalá mo ba akó?"

Kumulô ang dugô ni Gerardo sa ginawâng iyón sa kanyá. Isang suntók
na úbos diín sa sikmurà ng demonyó ang kanyang iginanti. Ang liíg
niya'y nabitiwan at súkat ng pangahás na ngatál na ngatál sa poot,
at di magkantutúto sa pagsigáw ng sunódsunód na.--

--"Waláng-hiyâ!! magsísi ka ná ng iyóng kasálanan! ngayón, ngayon mo
akó makikilala!!"

Sa sasál ng gálit, at sa gitnâ ng pagngi-ngitngít, ay di nabatá ang
di damukúsin ang mukhâ ni Gerardo.

Si Gerardo na noó'y pigil sa bisig ng kasapakát ng kanyáng kaáway,
palibhasá't nadaíg siyá noón sa lakás, ay walâng naitugón kundî
mga sipà.

--"Ulupóng!! mga duwág!! Ganyán ang mga duwág!!"

--"Pápatayin, pápatayin kitá, salbáhe!!" ... Umúrong ang demonyo ng
isáng hakbáng; itinaás ang kanang kamáy, at nagpatúloy:

--"Nakikíta mo ito, anák ng...?"--Noón ay kumidlát; at sa pamamagitan
ng liwanag nito, ay napagmalas ng binatà ang kakilakilabot na talibong
ng kaaway.--"Itó, itó, ang sa iyo, ngayóy uutás! Uutás! nauunawàan
mo ba?"

--"Sa mga duwag akó'y di natatákot!"--ang nakabibinging sigaw ni
Gerardo; at úbos lakas na nagpumilit makakulagpós sa pumipigil sa
kanyá. Walâng nasapit ang abâng binatà sa mga bakal na bisíg ng
yumáyapós sa kanyáng katawan ¡Isa pang saksi ng pangingibabaw ng
Lakás sa Hinà!

--"Binagábag mo ang mapayapà kong buhay;"--ang dugtóng ng
demonyo--"isiniwálat mo ang mga lihim na pinakaiingat-ingatan ko,
ginising mo ang poot sa akin ng isang báyang dati'y nakayukô sa aking
bawá't maibigan, pinakalaitlait mo ako, pinakadustâdustâ sa matá ng
lahat,--ano ang sa aki'y nalálabí? Anó ang dápat kong gawín? ¡Hindì akó
isáng babáe na sa gitnâ ng pagkasawî, ay masisiyahan sa pagtutukmol,
sa pananambitan, at pananangis! ¡Hindî ako ang ulól na magsisisi sa
aking mga nagawâ; hindî ako batàng musmos na mapalúluhód sa aking
mga ipinahámak úpang sila'y hingan ng tawad! Ah, hindî!... ¡Akó ay
isáng tunay na laláki--isáng laláking buháy na lagì ang loób!--Akó ang
bantóg na si Kapitang Memò na di nagugúlat kahima't sa kamatayan! ¡Akó
ang laláki na marúnong maghigantí!!... Ah, walâng hiyâ! Tálastasin mo
na isinumpâ ko ang ikáw ay patayín! patayín!! patayín!!! Unawâin mo
patayin!!! Nárito, nárito akó, nárito si Kapitang Memò upang tumupád
sa kanyáng sumpâ!!"

Mulîng itinaás ng sukáb ang kánang kamáy; ¡dápwa't ang karawaldawal na
náis ay di nagwagí!... Isáng sing-bilís ng kidlát ang noo'y namagitnâ,
pumigil sa nakayambáng kamáy, at umágaw sa matúlis na patalím.

Sa sumunód na sandalî, si Kapitang Memò ay nábulagtâ. Si Gerardo'y
ligtas; iniligtas siyá ni Florante, na sa gitnâ ng gayóng kabayanihan
at pagwawagí, di kinukusa'y napasigaw ng--"Oh mga swail!! Ang Diyos
ay hindî natutúlog!"

Nang mámalas ang pagkakátimbuwáng ni Kapitang Memò, ang kanina'y
pumipigil kay Gerardo ay kumaripas ng takbó.

Sinundán siyá ng dalawáng magkatóto, dapwa't di inabutan. Biglâng
nawalâ. Kinupkóp ng dilím!...

Oh ang nagagawâ ng dilím ng gabí!

Ang kadilimán bagáng iya'y nilaláng na talagá úpang makatúlong sa
mga karúmaldúmal na adhikâ, at mapagtagúan ng mga sukáb?

Kung túnay na ang Diyós ay siyáng lumaláng sa kadilimáng iyán, .... ang
katotohánang itó, kung katotohánan ngâ, ay nakapagpapa-alinlangang
lubhâ sa pagka-makatwiran ng Diyós na iyán!...







XVII

DIYATA'T BUHÁY KA PA?


Dumating ang magkatoto sa mahabang daan na patungo sa Maynilà.

Kaginsaginsa'y naulinigan nilá mulâ sa malayò ang isang sasakyang
humahagunot... Lumaláon ay lumalakas, sa kanilang pakinig, ang
kalugkog ng mga gulong; lumalaon ay tumitingkad, sa kanilang paningín,
ang dalawang ilaw ng sasakyan. Di nagtagal at nálapit ang kalesa
sa magkaibigan.

Tumingin ang dalawang binatà sa loob. Nakilala nila ang lulan: si
Elena at ang taksíl! Nagulamihanan si Gerardo. Natigilan sandalî, at
... kagaya ng isang ulol na hinagad ang sasakyang lumilipad. Sinundan
siya ni Florante.

Sino ang makatatatáp sa makamandág na mga damdaming noo'y gumigiyagis
at sumásakal sa pusò ni Gerardo?... Oh! Diyatà? Ang kanyang kasi sa
piling ng ibá, sa piling ng isang kaaway? Diyatà? At sa gayóng dilím
ng gabi? At sa gayóng mga pook?... Oh! Kataksilan!... At yaong mabilís
na takbóng iyon, ¿anó ang kahulugan?...

Paninibughô, poot, pagka-awà sa kanyang irog, ay sunod-sunod na
dumatál sa boô niyang katauhan. Ang sigaw ng kanyang dangal, ng
dangal ng kanyang pagkalalaki, ay daglíng pinukaw ang bangís at init
ng silangan niyang dugô, pinawì ang pagkahapò ng kanyang katawan,
at nagdulot ng ibayong lakás at siglá sa nanglulumóng dibdib.



Walâng tugot ng katatakbó ang dalawang magkatóto. Lumalaon ay lumalaki
ang pagitan nila at ng sasakyan. Sasabihin ng mga pusòng mahihinà,
na sila'y walâ nang pag-asa. Dapwa't di gayon. Sa mga kawal na iyon
ng kabayanihan, ang pag-asa sa isang pagwawagí ay lalong kumikinang
at nagbabaga habang napápabíngit sa panganib, pagkasawî at kamatayan.

Talagáng ganyan ang mga bayani!

Talagang ganyán ang mga naghahabol at umuusig sa ngalan ng Matwíd,
sa ngalan ng Dangál, sa ngalan ng isáng dalisay na Pag-ibig! Parating
buháy ang Pag-asa! Papaano'y buháy na lagi ang pananalig na, sapagka't
katwiran ang hánap, ay may isáng makatwirang Bathalà sa Langit na sa
kanila'y tutulong at magdudulot ng tagumpay.



Pagkaráan ng ilang sandalî, ang sasakyáng hinahábol ay sumapit sa
isáng tuláy na lumà. Sa isáng dulo ng tuláy na iyon ay may isáng
malakíng bútas na, sapagka't di pa natatagalan ay di alám ni Juancho,
ni ng kutserong si Kikò, ni ng kanilang kabáyo.

Nangyari ang di hinihintáy: Ang mga páang unahán ng hayop ay tumamà sa
butas,--kaya't dagling napatigil. Ang kabáyo ay di makabángonbangon
sa pagkasubásob. Nagkangbabalì ang latiko at nagkangmamálat si Kikò
sa pagsigáw, dapwa't maanong natinag ang hayop sa pagkápangaw!

Si Juancho ay galít na galít sa kanyang kutsero. Bumaba sa kalesa at
pagdaka'y binatukan nang makalawa ang abang si Kikò.

--"Torpe! animal! bruto! Mangutsero lang ay di ka marunong!... Bakit
di kalagin ang tirante, cabrón?"

Si Kiko nama'y susukot-sukot na isinauli ang latiko sa lalagyan,
at saka susukot-sukot ding kinalág ang tirante. ¡Kay bait na
tao! Pagkababàbabà ng loob! ¡Kay gandang ugalì! Mga taong gayá niya'y
dapat pagkawang-gawaan ng lahat ng mga nangangarap at nagmamalasakit
sa isang maligayang bukas ng Bayang Pilipino! Dapat patulugin ang mga
taong ganyan sa isang palasio na may isang dinamita sa ilalim!... ¡Ang
busabos ay busabos lang ang iaanák!... Kung kayâ may mapangbusábos
na panginóon, ay sapagka't may napabubusabos!...



Samantalang tinutupad ni Kikò ang banal na utos ng kanyang mahal na
amo, ay siyang pagdating ng dalawang binatang hangós na hangós.

Lumapit ang isa kay Elena na noo'y nakahilig sa loob ng sasakyan at
kasalukuyang hinihimatay na naman, samantalang ang isa nama'y sinugod
si Juancho at pasigáw na tumanong:

--"Síno ka?"

--"At ikaw, sino ka?"

Si Juancho'y biglang napaurong ng mamalas ang tindig ng nangangalit
na si Gerardo.

--"Ha? Gerardo?"--ang kanyang pamanghang tanóng.--"Diyata't si Gerardo
ka? Diyata't buháy ka pa?"

Inaunat ni Gerardo ang kanang kamay na may pigil na isang patalim at
nanginginig na nangusap:

--"Taksil, anó ang ginawâ mo kay Elena?... Sumagot kaagad ó ikaw
ay mamámatay!"

Si Elíng noo'y nasaulian na ng diwà. Nadinig niya ang boses ni Gerardo;
at nakilala ang kanyang irog na ibinalitang namatay. Lumuksó ang
binibini sa kalesa at hihikbî-hikbîng niyakap ang binatà.

--"Oh, Elena!"--ang mapanglaw na bigkas ni Gerardo;--"Anó ang ibig
sabíhin ng lahat ng ito?--Ako'y námamanghâ!... Bakit ka nápaparito?"

--"Ginahás akó ng táong iyan!"

--"Oh tampalasang lalaki! Walang pusò! Di mo na inalaálang akó ay
may kamay!"

Ang mapusok na binatà ay biglang lumundag sa kinatatayuan ni
Juancho. Tangka niyáng itarak sa dibdib ng sukáb ang hawak na
patalím. Dapwa't di itó nangyari. Si Elena ay namagitnâ.

--"Gerardo, oh Gerardo!"--ang kanyang hibik;--"huwag kang papatay ng
iyong kapwà, tanging pamanhik!"

--"Bayaan ako, Elena!--Alam ko ang aking ginágawâ!--Pumatay ng kapwà
ay di laging kasalanan!--Ang kamay ko ay di nangíngimìng magpatulò
sa dugông maitím!--Inibig ng lalaking itó na iluksó ang iyong puri,
at nang sa gayo'y madungisan ang aking karangalan!"

--"Ha! ha! ha!"--ang pairíng na halakhak ni Juancho--"Tinatawanan kita,
Gerardong hambog! ha! ha! ha!"

Muling sinugod ni Gerardo ang kaaway, dapwa't namagitnâng mulî
si Elena.

--"Giliw ko, nalalabuan ka ng isip, napadadaig ka sa kainitan ng
iyong dugô; huwag oh, huwag! Maghunós dili ka!"

--"Bayaan mo akó Elena!"

--"Gerardo, may mga hukuman, may Justicia, may Diyós!"

--"At may Juancho na di nagugulat sa sanglibong gáya mo, palalò!!"--ang
pagdaka'y isinabad ng swail.

--"Diyatà, Elena, at ipagtatanggol mo pa ang isa kong kaaway?"

--"Hindî ko ibig na siya'y ipagtanggol. Ang kalulwa mo ang siya kong
alaála. Ayokong madungisan ang kanyang linis; ayokong sumuway siya
sa bilin at utos ni Bathalà!"

--"Malayò, Elena malayò sa akin! Ni Dios, ni ikaw, ni sino pa man ay
di ako dapat sisihin sa aking gagawin!... Malayò!"

Nagpumiglás si Gerardo; nabitiwan ni Elena ang kanyáng katawan,
dapwa't hindi ang kamay na may hawak sa sandata.

--"Pumayapà ka, Gerardo! Huwag mong ikikilós ang iyong kamay, kung
ibig mong huwag akong masugatan. Bitiwan mo iyáng patalim, ó mahihiwá
ang mga dalirì ko! Bitíw, aking irog, bitíw!"

Sumukò din sa wakás ang kapusúkan ng binatà.

--"Duwag! ha! ha! ha! talagá kang duwag!"--ang sigaw ni Juancho na
anaki'y isang bukod na matapang.

Si Florante na mulâ nang dumating sa tulay ay di umi-imik, ngayo'y
humarap kay Juancho at banayad na nangusap:

--"Ang táo ay malayà hanggan siya'y gumagalang sa matwid; kapag
binaluktot niya ang katwiran, kapag siya'y lumabag sa makatwirang mga
utos, ang kanyang kalayaan ay dapat bawiin. Ikaw ay sumalansang sa
inaáatas ng matwid. Kami ay may karapatang kumatawan sa Justicia. Isukò
mo sa amin ang iyong kalayáan."

--"Ha! maginoong Florante! At sino pô kayo na aking susukuan?"

--"Walang maraming salitâ! Sasáma ka sa hukúman ó hindî?"

--"At sino pô kayó na aking sásamahan?"

--"Mga kapantay mo, na ngayo'y may karapatáng makapangyári sa
iyó!... Sasáma ka ó hindî?"

--"Baka ikaw ay nahihílo!"

--"Sumagót ka ng tapát, sasáma ka ó hindî?"

--"Híndî!!"

--"Ulol! Ibig mo pang ikaw ay gamítan ng lakás?"

--"Hitsura ninyong iyán ang aking uurungan!"

Si Juancho ay naglilís ng manggás at inawasíwas ang kanyáng sundang. Si
Florante nama'y biglang inalantad ang dala-dalang talibóng na inagaw
kangína kay Kapitang Memò.

--"Halíng!"--ang kanyang sigaw--"Nakikita mo ito?"

Tiningnan ni Juancho ang sandata. Napaurong. Nangdididilat. Nakilala
ang talibong.

--"Bakit iya'y nasa sa iyó? At bakit iya'y may dugô?"--ang pahiyaw
na usisà--"Inanó mo ang aking kapatid?"

--"Ginawâ ko sa kanya ang gagawin ko sa iyo kapag di ka sumunod
sa amin!"

--"Anó ang ginawâ mo sa kanya?"

--"Siya'y pinatay ko!"

Isang pailalím na saksák sa sikmurà ni Florante ang itinugon ni
Juancho. Si Florante sa lakás ng saksák ay daglíng nabaligtad, dapwa't
noon sandaling iyon ang kanyang kaaway ay dinaluhong ni Gerardo,
nagkágulong-gulong sa tulay at sa wakas ay nahulog sa ilog.

Ang tubig ng ilog na iyon ay may labinglimang dipá ang lalim; at si
Juancho ay di marunong lumangoy.

Si Kiko na may kaunting pagkabinabae ay nápakurús nang makalawá,
pagkukurús na sinalíwan ng sunód-sunód na "Susmariosep" at "Kaawàan ka
ng Diyós!" Sa kalakihán ng tákot ay dalì-dalìng lumulan sa kalesa at
talagáng tangkâ niya'y patakbuhíng mulî ang kabáyong nakawalâ ná sa
pagkakásilat, dapwa't nang hahagkisín ná ang háyop ay siyang pagsigaw
sa kanyá ni Gerardo ng:

--"Hoy!! Saan ka paparoon?"

Si Kiko'y kinilíg at parang tulíg na bumulalás ng di mawawàang mga:

--"Aba hindî pô, dine pô lang, walâ pô!"

Pagdaka'y inalúlan ni Gerardo sa kalesa ang sugatáng si Florante at
si Elíng, na noo'y putlângputlâ, nanginginig, at nanghihinà.

Nilísan nilá ang tuláy na iyon, na ayon kay Kikò ay lubhâng
kakilakilabot.







XVIII

PAHIMAKÁS NI FLORANTE.


Sa sumunód na sanglinggóng singkád, sa boông bayan ng Libís, ay
walâng napaguusápan ang síno-síno man, saán mang súlok magkatatagpô
kundî ang matalinghagàng gabí na sumaksi sa gayóng mga pangyayáring
nakapanghihilakbot na lubhâ, at hálos di mapaniniwaláan ng mga di
mapaniwalâing taga-Libís, dángan lang at may isáng Gerardo, isang
Elena, at isáng Floranteng sugatán, na nagpapatúnay sa mga nangyári.

Lahát ng makadinig sa kasaysáyan ng gabíng iyón ay nagkakaisá na
ang sinápit ni Kapitang Memò at ng kanyáng kapatid ay "isang marápat
na gantíng palà ng Langit sa kanilang mga inasal." Subalì, anó ang
nangyári kay Kapitang Memò? Walâ táyong nababatíd kundî ang katotohánan
na siya'y nasugátan. Dápwa't namatáy kayâ ang bantóg na mámamatay? Ni
si Florante, ni si Gerardo ay di itó masagót nang tahásan. At tila
ngâ di matitiyák nino man ang bágay na itó, sapagka't kung túnay man
na mabisà ang pagkakasaksák ni Florante,--bágay na pinatotohánan nang
pagka-walâng malaytáo ni Kapitang Memò ng siya'y iwan nina Gerardo--ay
túnay din naman na dáhil sa kadilima'y di matiyák ng binatà kung
saáng bahági ng katawán tumamà ang patalím, kung sa dibdib, kung
sa sikmurà ó kung sa tiyán. Tangí rito nang dalawin kabukasan ang
mga poók na iyón ay walâng napagkita kundî ang namumuông dugô ng
nasawîng pinunò. Maaárì na siya'y namatáy noón ding gabing iyón,
at ang kanyáng bangkáy ay dinalá sa ibáng pook at ibinaon ng kasama
niyáng nakataanán kina Florante. Maaárì na hindî siya nagtulóy sa
pagkamatáy; na nang masaulían na ng diwà ay nakapag-inót na lumakad
at tumungo sa isáng kublí at maláyong bahági ng iláng.

Sa dalawang "maaarìng" itó, alín kayâ ang túnay na nangyári? Mag-gáwad
ng pasiyá ang bumabása.



Iniaátas ng kahusáyan na usigin kaagád ng hukuman ang madugông
sigalot, upang sa gayo'y mapatunáyan kun sino ang may sála sa boông
kasiyaháng-loób ng lahát, at sa ibáyo ng lahat ng mga pag-aálinlángan.

Tatlóng áraw na ang nakararáan. May mga higing na sina Gerardo'y
ipadadakip, dapwa't higing lang. Kundanga'y sa boông bayan ng Libis,
sina Kapitáng Memò ay walâ ni isang kamag-ánakang malápit ni kaibigan
na nagkaloób na pumúkaw sa kapangyaríhang nagwawalâng-bahalà. Nguni't
saán útang ang pagwawalâng-bahálang itó ng mga pinunò? Aywan
natin. Lubhâ siyang kataká-taká.

Hindî masasábing mahírap dakpin sina Gerardo; sapagka't ang mga itó
ay walang alís sa Libis. Si Gerardo'y waláng iniintay óras-óras kundî
ang siya'y ipatáwag ng hukúman; samantalang si Florante namán ... oh,
si Florante! Lalòng madalî siyáng hulihin!

Kahabaghabag na binatà! Pagkatapos na masagip sa panganib ang isáng
kaibigan, pagkatapos na masunód ang átas ng matwid, ay siyá pa ngayón
ang papagdudusáhin sa gitnâ ng isáng mapaít na kapaláran! Ang kanyáng
súgat ay lumulubhâ. Walâng lagót hálos ang di maampát na tulò ng
dugô. Araw-áraw ay humihinà ang dati'y malusóg, sariwà, at malakás
niyáng katawán; tumatamláy ang mga matá na dati'y maningning na lagì;
pumapangláw ang dati'y masayá at palangitíng mukhâ.

Si Gerardo ay balisángbalisá sa paglubhâng itó ng mahál na kaibigang
nagligtas sa buhay niyá. Hindî siya humihiwalay kahi't sumandalî sa
piling ni Florante, tangì na lamang kung kailangang totoo.

Siyá ang nagpapakain, siya ang umaalíw, siyá ang nagbibihis, siyá ang
tumatánod sa may sakít araw-gabí. Kusang nilimot, isinatabí na muna
ang ligayang tuwî na'y hinihingî ng kanyáng pusò, ang pakikiuláyaw,
ang matamis na pakikipagtitigan, ang paghalík sa bangó, at pagtatamasá
ng boong luwalhatì at láyaw sa kandungan ng kanyáng Julieta.

Dapwa't sáyang na pagpapágod ang kay Gerardo! Sa likód ng maíngat
niyáng pagaalagá sa maysakít, ay walâ siyáng námalas kundî ang
lalò pa manding paglubhâ nitó, ang lalòng panghihinà ng katawan,
ang lalòng pagdalang ng tibók ng buhay, hanggang sa wakas ay sumápit
ang mapaít na sandalî nang ang mga manggagámot sa gitnâ ng di masáyod
na pangangambá ng lahat ay tahásang nagpahayag na sila'y walâ nang
pag-ásang mailigtás pa ang may sakit.

--"Ginámit na namin ang lahát ng paráang sakláw ng áming kaya"--ang
wikà nila--"Walâ na kaming magágawâ. Gayón ma'y magsidulóg kayó
sa ibáng manggagamot na lalòng pantás kay sa ámin,--siná Valdez,
Angeles, halimbawà."

Háting gabíng malálim nang ang pagsukòng itó ay ipahayag.

Minabuti ni Gerardo ang pagtáwag  ng ibáng manggagámot sa
Maynilà. Tinangkáng lumuwás, nguni't kailán? Pagbubukáng
liwayway? Makasanglibong hindî! Si Gerardo ay isáng táo na kapag
iníbig na gawín ang isáng bágay, ay di marunong magpabukás. Noon din
sandalîng iyón siya'y napa-Maynilà. Ni tren, ni bapor, ni kalesa ay
walâ; kaya't nangabayo, nangabáyong sumagupà sa gayóng dilím ng gabí!

Sa pagdáan niyá sa tapat ng báhay ni Elena, ay nagkatáong nakadungaw
ang kanyáng kasi. Tumigil sandalî, ipinahiwátig sa tatlóng salitâ
ang lagay ni Florante, at daglîng nawalâ: parang palasô na lumipád
sa Kamaynilàan.

Si Elíng ay balisáng-balisá; nagbihis, at noón din ay napasáma sa
bahay ni Florante.

Nang siya'y dumatíng ang may sakit ay kasalukuyang nagsasalitâ.

--"Nanay"--ang wikà sa iná, kay aling Tinay.--(Si Florante'y wala
nang amá.) "Ayoko nang nakahigâ, ibig ko'y nakasandal." Nang masunod
ang hilíng ay tinitigan ang lahat ng nangároon. Bukod kay Elena at sa
kanyang iná ay nakilala ng may sakit ang mga katoto niyáng si Faure,
si Lauro, si Baltazar, at saka ang magagandáng Pacita, Nena, at Milíng.

--"Elena, si Gerardo?"--ang pagdaka'y itinanóng ng makitang walâ roón
ang tangi niyang kaisáng-loób.

--"Lumuwás siyá, upang tumáwag ng manggagámot."

--"Para sa akin?"

--"Oo."

Nagbuntong-hininga ang may sakít.

--"Oh!"--anya,--"bákit kayâ at nagpapakapagod ng ganitó si
Gerardo? Papaano kayâ ang dapat kong gawín úpang makagantí sa kanyá?"

--"Florante, malakí ang útang ng loób ni Gerardo sa iyó. Iniligtás
mo ang kanyáng búhay!"

--"O, ay anó iyón? Bakit siya kikilala ng útang ng loób sa akin
gayóng walâ akong ginagawâ kundî tumupád ng katungkulan?... Para
namang siya'y di si Gerardo!"

--"Kung gayón, Florante, ni ikáw ay di rin dápat kumilála ng utang
sa kanya, sapagka't ang pagpapágod niyáng ginugúgol sa iyó ay isang
katungkúlang nagbubúhat sa alin mang mabuting pagtitingínan ng mga
magkakaibigan, magkakasáma, at magkakapatid sa isáng adhikâ."

Si Florante ay napangitî nang maunawàang siya'y nadaíg sa
pangangatwiran ni Elena.

--"Tálo mo akó, Elíng"--ang kanyáng wikà--"At ako'y sumusukò... Sabihin
mo kay Gerardo na maraming salamat!"

Pumikít ang may sakít at may kalahating-óras na di kumibô.

Walâng anó-ano'y dumilat, at pagkatapos na maibaling ang paningin sa
lahát ng dáko ay binigkás ng hálos pautál-útal ang sumúsunod:

--"Mga kaibígan,--ano bagáng bagay na mahalagá ... ang umípon sa
inyó ... sa aming marálitang tahánan? Batíd ba ninyó ... na dito'y
inyóng madadamá ... ang mga hulíng galáw ng ísip ... na dito'y inyóng
madidiníg ang mga hulíng anás ng kálulwa ... ang mga hulíng tibók ng
pusò ... ng isang sawîng palad na gaya ko?

"Oo, sawíng pálad! Iyán ang dápat itáwag ... sa akin na mamámatay
nang walâ man lang nagagawâ ... sa kanyáng Bayan!

"Sawing pálad ang gaya kong ... hihimláy sa libing ... na tagláy ang
alaálang masungit ... na inaangkin ng isáng bandílang dayuhan ... ang
Lúpang sa kanya'y paglilibingan!

"Sawing pálad ako, na walâng napagkita ... sa boô niyang
buhay ... kundî mga úlap, mga luhà, mga paták ... ng dugông
ninanakaw! Ah! mamámatay ako ... nang di ko nakikita ... ang
paghihiganti ng sugatáng pusò ng isáng Apí! Mamámatay ako ng di ko
namamálas ... ang pagbabangong puri ng isáng Dinuduhagi! Mamámatay ako
ng di ko naitataás yaring kamay ... sa ngalan ng Kalayaan! Mamámatay
akó ... ng di ko mamamálas yaong alapaáp ... na lilitawán ng
Dakilang Lintík ... na tutúpok sa lahat ... ng mga pusòng duwág
mahihina't walang dangal ... ang Lintík na magpapalubóg ... sa lahát
ng Kapangyarihang dáyo, at magpapasikat ng boông dingál sa isáng
... Araw at tatlong Bituin!!"

Kinapós ng hiningá ang may sakít. Ibig pang magsalitâ, dapwa't di na
maarì. Tináwag ang iná, hinagkán at niyákap.

Tumahimík. Itinirik ang mga matá. Akalà ng lahát ay patáy ná. Dapwa't
hindî. Mulìng nangusap sa isáng mahinà at paós na boses:

--"Nánay, balútin ang aking katawán ... at ataúl sa bandilà ng
Bayan...!

"Paálam na ... giliw kong Pilipinas ... Isáng malayàng ... Bágong
Búhay!..."

Tumigíl ang tibók ng pusò; napútol ang galáw ng ísip; pumaitaás ang
kálulwa, úpang kailán ma'y huwag nang magbalík. Walâng naíwan kundî
isáng bangkáy, isáng ngalan, isáng halimbawà, isáng alaala, isáng
binhî ng katapangan....







XIX

PAGHIHIGANTÍ NG DANGÁL


Gayón na lang ang pagmamahal ni aling Tinay sa kanyáng anák,
gayón na lang ang pagkabúlag ng kanyang pag-ibig, na kahì ma't alam
niyáng siyá'y sasalansáng sa isáng mahigpit na utos, kahì ma't alam
niyang siya'y pilit na uusigin, at magdurusa sa bilangguan, ay hindî
nangyáring huwag pagbigyán-loób ang kahulíhulihang bilin ng tánging
bulaklák ng kanyáng pag-ibig, ang katapustapusang hibík ng isáng
pusòng bayáni--ng isang pusòng makabayan, ang pahimakás na hilíng
ng pinaglagakán ng boô niyang pag-ása, ang kahulíhulíhang tibók
ng búhay niyaóng masunurin, masipag, mabaít, at magalang na anák,
na sa gitnâ ng gayóng katandáan, ay siyáng ligaya ng kanyáng matá,
paraluman ng mga pangarap, at dangál ng kanyáng pagka-iná.

Lahát halos ng mga kamag-ának at mga kaibigan ni aling Tinay ay
nagkakaisang di mabuti ang kanyang inaakalàng pagsunod sa bilin
ni Florante.

--"Alalahánin mo, Tinay"--anilá--"na tayo'y nasásakóp ng ibáng
kapangyarihan. Ang gagawin mo ay isang malinaw na paglapastangan,
isang talampákang paghamon sa pamunúang amerikano!"

--"Ay anó sa ákin?"--ang tugon namán ni aling Tinay sa gitnâ ng
pagpipighatî--"Anó sa ákin ang kapangyaríhang iyan, anó ang lakás ng
pamunúan, anó ang bisà ng isáng mabangís na útos, anóng kailangang
magdúsa sa harap ng tagubilin ng mahal kong anák?"

--"Tinay, maghúnos dilì ka; ikaw ay nabubulágan."

--"Masasábi ninyó iyán sapagka't siya ay di ninyó anák, sapagká't
kayó ay di naghírap sa kanyá, sapagka't di ninyo alám ang halagá ng
aking Florante!"

Si aling Tinay ay humagulhól ng iyák kagáya ng isáng batàng musmos.

--"Ang nakakahirap sa iyó, Tinay"--anang isáng matandâng lalaki--"ay
napadádaig ka sa mga udyók ng pusò: áyaw kang mangatwíran nang
mahináhon. Makiníg ka sumandalî. Si Florante ay naghihingalô ná
nang hilingin ang tungkol sa bandilà, hindî ba?... Kung gayo'y dápat
mong tantuin na kapag ang tao ay naghihingalô, ang pag-íisip niya'y
humihinà, lumalabò, nakalilimot, at..."

--"Siyana ná, tio Kulás"--ang biglâng pútol ni áling Tinay--"Masasáyang
lang ang inyóng mga salitâ sa ákin. Dapat ninyóng matalastás na nóon
pa mang araw, ay nabanggit na rin sa akin ng anak ko, ang kanyang náis
na kapag siya'y namatay, ay huwag papalamutihan ang kanyáng ataúl ng
anó pa man maliban na ngâ lang sa isáng bandilàng pilipino...

"Ah, magpahingá kayó, mga pusòng mahihinà! Di ninyó batid ang
linaláyon ni Florante!... Ibig ipakíta ng anák ko na walâng bandilà
siyáng iginagálang, at walâng kapangyarihan siyang niyuyukûan kundî
ang bandilà't kapangyaríhan ng Tinubúang Lupà!

"Ibig niyáng ipahiwatig na di ang lahat ng utos ng pamunúan ay dápat
sundín; na kapág ang isáng kautusan ay walâ sa matwid, ang magtaás
ng noo, ang magmatigás, ang tumutol, ay di isáng kasalanan, kundî
isáng átas ng kabayanihan, isang tandâ ng katinuán, isang taták ng
karangálan!"...

Si tandâng Kulás ay napanganga't sukat. Kailán má'y di niyá naapuhap
sa kanyáng gunita; ni natunghan sa lalòng malalim niyang panaginip
ang larawan ng isáng babáe na pinúpulásan sa mga labì ng gayong mga
salitâng sakdál ng titigás!

Iiling-iling na lumayô sa harap ni aling Tinay.

--"Eh, eh! Katakot-takot na babáe itó!"--ang tanging naibulóng sa
kanyang sarili.



Ibig ni aling Tinay, áywan kun bákit, na kapag namatay ang isáng táo,
ay málibing kaagád; áayaw ng búrol-búrol. Dahil dito'y kanyáng inihayág
na ang libing ni Florante ay idadáos sa ika ánim na oras ng umaga ng
araw ding iyon ng pagkamatay.



Nagbubukang liwaywáy.

Sa tapát ng namatayang báhay ay may isáng binatàng luksâng-luksâ,
nakatungó, nakasalikód kamay, at walang tigil ng kayayaó't
dito. Banayad ang mga hakbáng. Kagaya ng isang may iniisip na
malálim. Walâng kamalákmalák ay biglang napatigil. Tiningalâ ang
isang kimpal na alapáap sa mukhâ ng langit, at pinagalaw-galáw ang
úlo na animo'y may kinákausap doon.

Sino ang binatàng ito? Si Faure. Pakinggan natin ang tibok ng kanyang
damdamin:

"Florante, kay ligáya mo ngayon!--Nilisan mo na itóng Lupàng
maligalig--at ngayo'y náriyan ka na sa Bayan ng kapayapaán, sa Báyan
ng pagkakápantáypantáy, diyán sa walâng naghahari kundî ang isáng
Bathalàng sumasagisag sa banál na Katwiran...

"Oh, laki ng kaibhán ng iyóng kalagáyan, kay sa ámin dito sa lupà.

"Kayó diyán ay tahimik, walâng íringan, walâng paghihigantí, iisa ang
pananampalataya, iisa ang damdamin, waláng sinusunod kungdî iisang
bandilà, waláng iginagalang kungdi iisang dambanà; ang bandilà ng
Matwid at ang dambanà ng Katotohanan...

"Samantalang kamí sa bahaging itó ng Sangdaigdig, ay walang nalalasap
sa tuwituwi na, kungdi ang mapaít na latak ng buhay. Sa lahat ng
dako ay himutók, pananángis, panambitan, hinagpís ng mga ináapí, ng
mga tinaksíl na sawing palad, ng mga isinilang sa baníg ng hirap, na
kahima't may katutubong karapata't dangal ay lagì na lang niyuyurakan,
dinadayà, hinahamakhamak, dinudustadusta... ng mga palalòng mapagmataás
na nangbubúlag at nang-aalipin...

"Ah! sinong nagbabatá ng ganitong kalagayan namin ang di
makapagsasábing kayóng naririyan ay mapapalad?

"Kung gayon...

"Bakit itatangis ang inyong pagpanaw?

"Bakit ipagluluksâ ang inyóng paglípat sa kabilang búhay?

"Mahanga'y--ipagsayá, pagka't nariyan kayó sa lubós na kapayapaan.

"Nguni't--¡sinungáling!--Bakit di mapigil ang pagluhà niyaring pusò
tuwi kong magugunitâ ang mapangláw na tinig niyaong batingáw?

"Ah! Sapagka't ang tinig na iyon ay nagsasabing si Florante na giliw
kong kaibigan ay pumanaw sa akin. Sapagka't ang tinig na iyon ay
nagsasabing nalagasan na naman ng isáng kawal ang kabinataan--iyáng
kabinatàang sa araw ng bukas ay siyang magtatagúyod at magsasanggalang
sa isáng Bayang mahinà't hapô upang huwag muling mahulog sa hukay
ng pagkaaba.

"Nguni't...

"Kung dini sa Lupa'y nagkakailangan ang ating lahì ng hukbó ng mga
bayani upang makapagtanggol sa kanyang Karangalan, Kalayaan at Buhay,
diyan namán sa Langit ay nagkakailangan siya ng mga kinatawán upang
idalángin sa haráp ni Bathalà ang kanyang ganáp na Katúbusan!

"Idalangin ang Katúbusan!--ang Katúbusan ng isang Bayang laging
nanglulumó ang puso sa hápis at uhaw sa tunay na ginhawa; ang katúbusan
ng isang lahìng pinipilit ng walang karapatán sa isang kalagayang
salungát sa kanyang ninanasà at lagì nang pangarap.

"Idalangin ang Katubúsan!

"Sa dakilàng tungkuling ito, ay huwag nawang makalimot ang mga
kaluluwang pilipino na lumuluwalhatì sa kabilang búhay..."

Ang binatá'y mulíng tumungó, lumákad nang kauntî, bago dinúkot sa
bulsá ang kanyáng orasán. Mag-iíkaánim ná ng umága. Si Faure ay nanhík.

¡Kay panglaw doon sa bahay! Bihiráng matá ang walâng patak ng luhà;
bawa't mukhâ ay larawan ng isáng di masayod na lumbáy ng kalulwá;
sa bawa't labì ay walâng pumupúlas kundî pawàng pagkahabág,
panghihináyang, panalángin, mga buntong-hiningá...

¡Kay kapal ng mga makikipaglibíng! Ang malakíng báhay ni Florante ay
lumíit sa karamihan ng táo. Lahát halos ng mga kaanib sa "Dakilàng
Mithî" ay nahandoón. Si Gerardo lang ang walâ, papaano'y noon mga
sandaling iyon ay karárating lang niyá sa Maynilà.

Ika ánim na ganáp ng umága nang ipanáog ang ataúl, na pinápalamutihan
ng isang matandâ at malápad na Bandilàng Pilipino.

Sa sambahan muna dinalá ang bangkay. Nang mulîng málabás, at nang
tutungúhin na ang libingan, ay siyáng pagdatíng ng... (¡sinasabi na ngâ
bá ni tandâng Kulás!)... limáng kayumangging kawal ng konstabulario
at isáng putêng pinunò, na taglay sa báywang ang isáng kumíkináng na
sandata na sa kahabaan ay humíhiláhod sa lupà!...

Nagdidilim ang mukhâ ng pinunò. Nang malapit sa ataul ay daglíng
tumigil, nilabnót, iniwálat at niyurákan ang Bandilà!

Isáng kasíng bilís ng lintík ang noón din ay humaráp sa walâng-pitagang
pinunò, at walâng sabi-sabi'y ikinintál pagdáka sa mukhâ nitó ang
dalawâng sampál na sunód.

¡Kinilabútan ang láhat!

¡Gulóng katákot-tákot!

¡Ang gayóng kapangahasán ng isang kayumanggi sa isang nakasableng pute,
hanggá nang hanggá ay noón lang násaksihan ng mga táong iyon!

Sa sumunód na sandalî, ang Lakás at ang Kapangyarihan ná, ang siyang
nagharì.

Ang kayumanggíng pangahás ay pinagsunggabánan ng mga kawal ng
pamahalàan. Mga dágok, tadyák, tungáyaw, pagláit, ang naghatid sa
kanyá sa bilanggúan.

¡Kataka-taká ang kapal ng táo na natípon sa sigalot na itó! Boông báyan
halos! Karamíhan sa kanilá ay mga lálaki--mga laláking may mga bísig
at pag-iisip!... Gayón ma'y lahát ay walâng ginawâ kundî ang tumangá,
manóod! manginíg!! mamutlâ!!! matákot!!!!

Untî-untîng naáyos ang guló. Ang nabagabag na libíng ay naipatúloy din.



Noóng gabíng iyon, ang pinunò ng "Konstable" ay dinalaw ng isang
kakilákilabot na panagínip. Isáng bangkáy ang napaginipan niyang tumayô
nang dahan-dahan, lumákad, humaráp sa kanyá, itináas ang dalawâng
kamay at nagkakangdidilat sa pagsigaw ng: "Mane, Thecel, Phares!"

Sa katakutan yatà at pagkágulantáng ang makisig na pinunò ay kamuntî
nang makálundág sa dungawán ng kanyáng silid.







XX

SI ELÍNG AT SI GERARDO.


Katanghalìang tapát.

Sa isáng báhay na malíit at sa tabí ng isáng dungawán, ay nakaupông
magkaharáp si Elena at ang bathalà ng kanyáng pusò, na noón lamang
dumating.

Ang binibini'y walâng kakibôkibô; nakatitíg sa dibdib ni Gerardo ang
mapupungay niyang matá, na pára bagáng pinipilit na mahuláan ang mga
damdaming doo'y nakukulóng. Ang binatà nama'y nakatungó, kagát ang
labì, sapúpo ang malápad na nóo ng kánang kamáy, at... walâ ding
imík; ang maminsan-minsang pagbuntóng-hiningá, ang nagsisikláb na
paningín, ang nagdidilím na mukhâ, ang nóong kunót ay nagkákaisa sa
pagpapahiwátig na hindî kaligayáhan ang itinitibók ng pusò. Anó ang
nangyayari sa táong itó? Dinadalaw kayâ ng panibughó? Nagsisisi kayâ
sa isáng nagawâng kasalanan?

--"Ang mga taksil!"--Itó ang nawikà ni Gerardo pagkaraan ng ilang
sandalî.--"Nagawâ nila iyón, at,.. diyatà nama't ang bayang iya'y
nakatiís?... Wala na namáng ginawâ kungdî ang humalukipkip? Diyatà
ba nama't walâ ni isáng tumulong, walâ ni isáng nagsanggálang kay
Faure? Walâ ba roón sina Leon, siná Marcelo? Walâ ba ni isáng laláki?"

Si Elena ay íiling-iling na sumagót:

--"Pusòng laláki?... Ay, Gerardo! Ni isa'y walâ! Siná Leon ay handoóng
lahát."

--"Nguni't sa ngalan ng Diyós, ano ang kaniláng ginawâ?"

--"Walâng  walâ kundî ang tumingín!"

--"Oh, tumingín! tumingín!!"--ang mapangláw na úlit ng binatà.--"At
patí bagá siná Leon ay nakitingín? Díyata't ang mga ginoóng iyán na
kung tawagi'y mga makabayan--silá na sa tuwing magtatalumpati'y walâng
ipinangangalandákan kundi dugo hangga't kailangan!--díyata't ang mga
ginoóng iya'y nakitingín patí? Oh, tumingín! Mangalandákan! Talagá
bagáng táyo'y hanggán diyan na lang? Pulós na dilà at matá na
lámang ang gagamítin? Ang áting bagáng mga bísig sa habang panahon
ay pananatilíhin sa pagkakahalukipkip? Di na bagá tayo magkakalóob
na sila'y igaláw?...

"Oh báyan! báyan!! Násaán ang iyóng dangal?... Násaán ang iyóng lakás?

"Makapangyarihan ka sa lahát, nguni't,"

--"Diyós lang ang makapangyayári sa kanyá;"--ang kaagad ay ipinútol
ni Elíng.--"Ang mga mapanglúpig na táo at ibáng báyan ay hindî! Di
ba gayón, Gerardo?"

--"Túnay ang sábi mo, dapwa't di siyang nangyayári."

--"Sawîng pálad na lahì ang átin!"

Ang binata'y mulíng tumungó at mulíng napipi. Nakaráan ang iláng
sandalî. Kaginsaginsa'y itinaás ang úlo, at tumindíg.

--"Bakit, Gerardo?"--ang usisà ni Elíng--"Anó ang nangyayári sa
iyó? Bakit ka nagkákaganyán?"

--"Walâ, Elena! Akó muna'y magpapaalam."

--"Bákit, saán ka páparoón?"

--"Walâ, may gágawin lang akó."

--"Matutulungan ba kitá?"

--"Maraming salámat, Elíng!"

--"Ano ang gágawin mo?"

--"Tútupad ng isáng katungkulan."

--"May miting ka bang dadaluhan?"

--"Walâ."

--"Alíng katungkulan ang sinasábi mo?"

--"Si Faure ay hahangúin ko sa bilangúan!..."

--"Hahangúin mo?... sa bilangúan?"

--"Oo, Elena, ililigtas ko, ililigtas kong pilit ang may loób
na nagtanggol sa Dakilàng Watáwat!... Isáng kautusáng di tumpák
sapagka't udyók ng simbuyó ng loob, ang nagbabáwal sa paggamit ng
Bandilàng Pilipino; nguni't hindî dáhil sa pagbabáwal na iyán,
ay maáarì nang siya'y yurákyurákan at dustâdustâin ng síno
mang harì-harìang ganid... Oh hindî!... Iyán ang watáwat na
pinagkamatayáng sagipín ni Rizal, ni Bonifacio, at ng libo-libo
pang bayani ng ating Kalayàan. Dahil sa watáwat na iyán nagpakamatáy
ang aking nunò, ang aking mahál na amá, at mga kapatíd!... At sakâ
ngayo'y hahamákin? Ah!... Ang pagtatanggól ni Faure ay isáng gawâng
dakilà! isang kabayaníhan!... Dápat ko siyang abulúyan. Palalayáin
ko at palalayáin ko kaagád ang bayáning laláki!"

--"At papáno ang iyóng gágawin?"

--"Kun hindî siya makúha sa pamamagitan ng malulumánay at mapayapàng
pangangatwiran,... dadaánin ko sa dahás! Dahás ang sa kanya'y nagpások
doón, maaárìng dahás lamang ang sa kanya'y magpápalabas!"

Ang boses ni Gerardo ay nanginginig. Ang mga matá niyá ay
nakapangingilabot.

Si Elena'y kagyat namutlâ at warì baga'y nangliliít sa kanyáng
pagkakáupô.

--"Diyós ko!"--anya--"Ano ang iyong gagawín, Gerardo? Ako'y
nahihintakútan!"

--"Bakit, Elena? Hindî ba matwid ang aking úusigin?"

--"Ipagpalagáy ko nang matwíd, subali'y bákit ka gagámit ng dahás?"

--"Hindî akó gagámit kundî kailangan; at ang lahát, kapag kailángan
ay dapat pangáhasán!"

--"Dápat pangahasán hanggáng di nalalábag sa mga útos!"

--"Oo, kung ang mga útos na iya'y nasasálig na lahát sa katwiran!...

"Matwíd ba ang ginawâng pag-lúpig at ang pagkábilanggo kay Faure?"

--"Siya'y nagbúhat ng kamáy sa kanyang kapwà!"

--"Túnay! Dapwa't bákit? Ah! Sapagka't ang gánid na iyón sa kanyáng
pagyúrak sa Dakilàng Watáwat, ay niyurakan ang púri, ang dangál,
ang kálulwá ng boông Kapilipinuhan!...

"Ah! Hindî mga sampál ang sa kanya'y dápat igantí! Oh, dapat
siyang magpasalámat at siya'y nasa sa gitnâ ng mga táong matiisin
at mababait. Dápat siyáng magpasalámat at.... Kung nagkátaon,
oh! ¡ang báyang iyan na binubúlag ng kaduwágan, ay nakamálas ng mga
paták.... niring dugô!"

--"Oh, Gerardo! Ikaw, kung minsán, ay kakilákilábot! Pinanglálamig
mo akó!"

--"Bakit, Elena? Natatakot ka bang mamatay akó sa pagtataguyod sa
púri ng mahál na Bandilà?"

--"Oh hindî, Gerardo! Alám mo nang ang pinakamatamís kong pangárap, ang
pinakamaálab na nais niríng pusò na sa iyóng iyó lang umaása, ay ang
makita kang namamayáni sa ikatutubós at ikalalayà ng tinubúang lupà,
ang makíta kang bangkáy sa piling ng Sagisag ng áting Búhay!... Hindî
kailangang ako'y maulíla sa iyó, hindî kailángang ako'y magdúsa,
hindî kailángang ako'y magluksâ, tumángis, at mag-isá sa habàng
panáhon! Titiisín ko ang lahat álang-álang sa Inang-Báyan!"

Napangitî si Gerardo. Ang mga pangungusap na iyón ay sumagád hanggang
pusò niyá. Kinintalan ng isang halík sa nóo ang kanyang paralúman,
bago tinabánan ang nanglalamíg na kamay nitó.

--"Maráming salamat, Elíng,"--anya--"Ngayon ay tulutan mo nang
ako'y yumáo."

--"Hintáy muna, Ardíng"--ang magíliw na samó ng binibini--"Hindî mo
pa nasásagót ang tanóng ko sa iyó kanina."

--"Alín iyón?"

--"Ang pagpapalayà kay Faure. Sakali't di mo matamó ang iyong hangad
sa pamamagitan ng mabuting salitaan, papáno ang iyong gagawín?"

--"Ah, sakâ mo na maaaláman!"

--"Sabihin mo ngayón sa ákin!"

--"Sakâ ná!"

Si Gerardo ay hindi na napapígil at nanáog agád. Si Elíng nama'y
walâng nagawâ kungdî ang dumúngaw, sundan ng tingin ang binatà,
bilangin ang kanyang mga hakbáng, at masdán kung saán siyá tutungo.

Nang si Gerardo'y hindî maabót ng kanyang matá, ang binibini'y mulíng
humílig sa dúyan at inahágis ang ala-ála sa salitáan kangína niláng
dalawa.

--"May katwiran si Ardíng!"--ang pabuntóng-hiningáng nábigkas sa
sarili, pagkaráan ng ilang sandalî--"Kay hírap ngâ namán ng walâng
kalayàan! Kung ang Pilipinas ay malayà, ang mga gayong panglulúpig,
at pag-alipustâ sa ating dangál ay hindî mangyayari...

"Kasákitsákit at pagkápait-pait na kalagáyan itong átin.

"Nguni't lagì na ba lang táyo sa ganitó,--lagì na ba lang susúkot-súkot
sa ilalim ng isáng watawat na hindî átin? Lagì na ba lang talúnan at
apí itóng áting báyan?...

"Oh, hindî! Hindî, hindí mangyayari ang gayón! Nang lalangin
ang Pilipinas ay hindî isinulat sa kanyang mukhâ ang pamagat na
alipin. Hindî nilalang ang táo upang bumusábos ó pabúsábos sa ibá! Ang
pagka-kayumanggí ng ating balát ay hindî tandâ ng isang kapalárang
mababà; iyán ay búnga ng singaw ng ating mga kaparángan at bundók!

"Oh, di mangyayaring ang kalagáyan nating itó ay sa habang panahón
ná! Ang Kasaysayan ng Sangsinúkob ay boông linaw na inauúlat ang
katotohánan na, kapag ang isang báyang nasasakúpan ay natútong humingî
ng kalayàan at pagsasarili, kapag ang báyang iyan ay napatunayan sa
gawâ ang karapatán niyá sa minimithîng mga biyayà,--ang báyang iyan
madalî ó maláon, sa pamamagitan ó ng kapayapàan ó ng paghihimagsík,
ay pilit na kakamtán ang kanyang nilaláyon....

"May nagsasábing nagkakailángan mulî ng isáng paghihimagsík sa
Pilipinas, upang mátamo ang pagsasariling pinipita.

"Hindî akó sang-ayon sa gayóng madugông paghahakà. Hindî nararapat,
hindî napapanahón, ni hindî kailángan ang isáng paghihimagsík. Ang
patalim ay dapat lamang hawakan kapág napadiwarà ná ang kahulihulíhang
patak ng pag-asa sa mapayapà at makatwirang pamamanhik sa báyang
nakasasakop. Ang Pilipinas ay may pag-asa pa... Ako'y nananálig na may
isang dakilàng Amerika na, sapagka't may puri at dangal ay di papáyag
magpakailan man na siya'y sumpâ-sumpáin ng isang báyang inamis,
at tawag-tawáging magdaraya! bulaan! taksil! magnanakaw!... Ako'y
nananálig na sapagka't siya'y namayani at nagbuhos ng dugông sarili sa
dambanà ng Kalayáan, ang báyang Amerikáno ay di malilinláng ang isang
lahìng sa twî-twî na'y uháw sa isang malayàng búhay! Ako'y nananalíg
na, sapagka't siya'y matalino at hindî mangmang ang Amérika ay hindî
magpapakáulól na magbibingibingihan sa mga ipinagsisigáwang áral,
balà at sumbát ng Kasaysayan ng Sangdaigdig. Ako'y nananálig na hindî
siya magpapakáulól na papáris sa ipinamalas na mga hidwâng kaasálan
ng mapanglúpig na Inglaterra at ng mapangbusábos na España!

"Oo, ang Pilipinas, ay mayroón pa ngâng pag-ása! At dahil dito'y
isang katiwalìang dî mapatatáwad ang bumangon ngayón at maghimagsík!

"Nguni't... sa haráp ng mga pagdayà, pagláit, at pagdustâ sa dangál ng
bayan, sa harap ng mga panglulupig at mga kaasalang hidwâ na ginagawî
dito ng mga harìharìan, ¿ay sino kayâ ang di mangangambá, sino kayâ ang
di sasagìan sa gunitâ ng maiitim na guníguní at madudugông ala-ala?...

"Ah!... Pag ganyán nang ganyán, kapag di napútol ang mga ganyang
gawâ, kapag ang mga nasaitaas ay di susugpuin ang kanilá ding
kasagwâan, kapag ang mga daing, hibik at sigaw ng nanga saibabâ
ay di didinggín... oh! ¿sino ang makapagsasabi, kapág nagkagayón
ná?.... ¡Maaárì na ang Bayang iyan na ulirán sa pagtitiis, ay di
makabatá sa anták ng sugat!!... ¡Maaárì na ang Bayang iyan ay mabúlag
sa laot ng kanyang pagkaamis!!... ¡Maaárì na siya'y makalimot sa
sarili, makalimot sa Diyos, makalimot na siya'y mahinà!... ¡¡Maaarì
na ang mabangís niyang dugô ay mágising at... kumulô!! ¡Maaárìng
sumipót diyan ang mga Bonifacio, ang mga Elias, ang mga Simoun,
ang mga Matanglawin, ang mga Kabisang Tales!!...

"Oh! Kapag nagkátaón!!...

"Pagkasaklapsakláp na dilidilihin!...

"Oh huwag! huwag, makatwirang Langit! huwag tulutang mangyari ang
gayong pagkapaitpait na bágay!!"...

Ganitó ang mga paghahakang sunod-sunod na sumagì sa pag-iisip ni
Elena--mga paghahakang kaipala'y dulot sa kanya ng tangang aklát
na kinababasahan sa likod ng mga salitáng: "Noli me Tángere at El
Filibusterismo."







XXI

MATWÍD Ó BALUKTÓT?


Hating-gabí.

Kinúkubkob ang boông báyan ng isáng kadilimang nakapanghihilakbót.

Ulap na sakdál ng itím ang nagpápasungít sa mukhâ ng lángit.

Walâ ni buwán, ni bitúin, ni talà. Ang lahát ng mga kaigá-igáyang
hiyás na iyán ng kalangitan ay áayaw pasilay, nagtatagòng parapara
na anaki'y nagtatampó, nagsasawà at nasusuklám ná sa mapagkunwarî,
at magdarayàng Sangkataúhan...

Máliban sa manakâ-nakâng táhulan ng mga áso, maliban sa mga
idinahák-dahák at iniubó-ubó ng mga natutuyô, máliban sa huni ng
sári-sáring ibong nagdapò sa mga púnong kahoy, maliban diya'y walâ
ng ingay na madidinig.

Lahát ay katahimíkan, dilím, kapanglawán.

Sa isáng súlok ng pinakaplaza ó liwasán ng Libís, ay may isáng táong
nakatayô. Sino siya? Aywan. Ang kanyáng nóo, mga matá at hanggang
ilóng ay natataklubán ng malapad na pardyás ng sambalilo; samantaláng
ang babà nama'y nakukublí sa mahabàng pangliíg ng kanyáng kapote.

Ang panginginíg ng katawán, ang pangangatál ng mga labì, ang hawak
na balaráw, ay paraparang nagpapahiwatig na ang táong itó ay may
gagawin! may gágawíng isang bagay na kakilakilábot!...

Nagkakanghahabà ang liíg ng lalaki sa pagtanaw sa isang bahay na
nakatayô sa kabilang panig ng liwasán. Ang pintô ng bahay ay nakabukás
at sa loób ng sílong ay may isáng ílaw na maliit. Sino ang nasa báhay
na iyon? Ang kasintahan kayâ ng lalaki? Nguni't bakit ang laláking
ito ay may tagláy na sandata, bakit gayón na lang ang panginginíg ng
kanyáng kataúhan? Naglilo kayâ ang iniíbig? At itó bagá ang gabíng
napilì niya úpang idáos ang paghihigantí?... Baká namán hindî, baká
namán hindî naglílo ang kanyáng sinisintá, kundî may isáng taksil na
ibig maglugsò noóng gabíng iyón sa púri ng búhay ng kanyáng búhay?

Aywán din ngâ.

Samantala'y ating masdán ang mga kílos ng laláki. Hindî na siya ngayón
nakatigil, lumalákad ná at tinutungo ang báhay.

Ang báhay na itó ay may tánod palá! isang nakabaril na ngayo'y lumabás
sa silong at lumuklók sa isang bangkô na nása sa labás ng pintùan.

Sandalî nating matyagan ang tánod. Siya'y may katandâan ná. Bukód
pa sa pandak, ang katawán niya'y hukót at payát na payát. Ang mga
matá, ay di lang nagpapahiwatig na ang katawáng iyón ay pinanáwan ná
ng lahát ng siglá, ng lahat ng ínit; inihahayág din namán nilá ang
katotohanánan na, ang kahabághabág na tánod ay may dalawáng gabí nang
di nakatitikím ng túlog.

Sabíhin pa ba! Sa gayóng pátag at tahimik na pagkakaupô ay walâ siyáng
nararamdamán kundî ang sa kanyang balintataw, ay ikínulbit-kulbít
ni áling Antók; walâ siyáng nauulinígan kundî ang mahinhíng áwit ni
Antok din; walâ siyáng nakikita kundî ang kanya ring kumaring Antok
na sásayawsayaw at pupúngaypúngay sa kanyang haráp.

Ang bayáning bantay ay humikáb nang sunód-sunód; untî-untîng nalitó;
untî-untîng umamín kay Antok; untî-untîng nayukáyok...

Na siya'y guardia at dahil dito'y di dapat yumukayok? Ay ano naman
kun siya'y guardia, sa ang pinag-guguardiahan namán eh, iisa-isa at
nakukulóng sa isang kulungan--isáng kulúngang bakal ang mga réhas,
at nakasusì pa, at ang susì, ay nasa loob ng kanyang bulsá?

Na, baká siya'y lusúbin ng mga kaaway, samantálang nayuyukayok? Hús! Ay
anó iyon? Gasino ná ang kalabitín ang kanyang baríl at gasino ná ang
humiyáw ng "Magnanákaw!!"

Na, baká siya'y masubukan ng teniente--ng tenienteng
mabangís?... Pshe! Síno ang masusubúkan--siyá? siyá na kung matulog
eh kay bábaw-bábaw, na sa isang kaluskós ng dagâ, sa isáng ingít
ng bubwit, ay nagigising? At síno ang susúbok? ang teniente?--ang
tenienteng lumákad lang eh, nayáyanig ang lupà,--ang tenienteng
walâng tigil ng ká-uubó at kadadahák, ang tenienteng paglákad eh,
humihilahod sa lupà ang sable--paghiláhod na kay ingay-ingay--ingay na
bumubuláhaw sa mga áso, hanggáng mga manók--mga manók at áso na kapág
nagpuputák at nagtatahól ay pilit na ikagigísing ng lalòng matákaw
sa pagtúlog?--Iyan ang tenienteng makasusúbok sa kanyá?... Malayòng
malayò, sing-layò ng langit sa lupà!

At sakâ, bukód sa rito, mayukayok man siya, ay hindî naman tangkâ niyá
ang matulog ah! ¡¡Kundî ang umiglip lang ah!! ¿Ay anó ang iglip?...

Sa dúlo ng mga ganitóng paghahakà ang bibig ng bantáy ay dáhandáhang
nábuka, ang mondo'y dáhandáhang nalímot at dáhandáhang tumulò ang
... aywan kung anó... mulâ sa... aywan kung saán.

At sa gitnâ ng gayóng pagkábuka ng bibíg, sa gitnâ ng gayóng pagkalímot
sa mondo, sa gitnâ ng gayóng pagtulò ng ... aywan kung anó--ay siyang
pagsulpót sa liwánag ng ilaw, at paglundág sa kanyáng haráp ng lálaking
kanina'y tatayôtayô sa isang súlok ng liwasán--ng laláking may háwak
na balaráw--balaráw na ngayo'y nakatiín sa sikmurà ng tánod!

Ang nágulantang sa kanyáng pakikiuláyaw kay Antok, ay walâng nagawa
kundî ang umígtad sa pagkakaupô, ipagngangáhang lalò ang bibig at
pandilatin ang mga matá!

Ang salitang "Magnanákaw!" ay hindî maisigaw!

Ang baríl ay hindî mákalabít!

--"Isáng kilos, isáng sigáw, at ikáw ay patay!"--ang pasalubong ng
kanyáng panaúhin...

--"Naku pô!" ang marahang tugón.

--"Ibíbigay mo ang bilanggô ó hindî?"

--"Naku pô!"

--"Sstt!... Sagutín akó... at madalî!"

--"Ay papáno pô bá... ang gágawin ko sa iyá'y... itiniwalà... sa ákin!"

--"Huwag mag-alaala... Ililigtás kitá... ako'y nangangakò sa ilálim
ng áking dangál."

--"Ay bakâ pô ako'y inyóng ululín... ay kaawà-awà pô..."

--"Ha? at ipinalalagáy mo akong magdarayà?"

--"Naku pô! hindi pô! patawád pô!"

--"Anó? Ibibigáy mo ang bilanggô ó hindî?"

--"Ay inakú pô! Huwag mo pong ididiín ang sundáng, at parang
hinahalúkay ang aking tiyán!"

--"Maúlit ka! Ibibigáy mo ó hindî?"

--"Ibibigáy pô!"

Noón din ay lumayà si Faure! Sa bugsô ng ligaya, at pagmamahalan ang
dalawáng magkatoto ay waláng naigáwad na pasalubong sa bawa't isá
kundî ang pipíng pagyayakapán.

Kasáma ang tánod na kagyát nilísan ng dalawá ang bilanggúan.



Kinabukásan ang tenienteng yumúrak nang walâng patumanggâ sa Bandilàng
Pilipino, ay nabalitàng patáy.

Isang talibóng daw ang nakatárak sa dibdib ng kahabaghabag na lumaláng
sa kanya ring pagkasawî...

Si Faure ay nakatákas sa ibang lupáin.

Doón sa mga kaparangá't bundók ng mga báyang malalayà--doón sa di
kilala ang kapangyarihan ng táo sa kapwà tao,--doón sa di abót ng
mapanglúpig na mga útos ng isang pamahalàang mapagbusábos--doón siyá
naniráhan, sa pilíng ng mga Tell, nang panátag ang pusò, payapà ang
kalulwá't pagiísip,--malayà katulad ng ibon sa himpapawid,--maligáya
katulad ng bulaklák na hinahagkán ng hamóg....




                                 WAKAS

                                   NG

                         Bulalákaw ng Pag-ása.